Merging the Instructional Design Process with
Learner-Centered Theory




Merging the Instructional Design Process with Learner-Centered Theory brings together the innova-
tions of two previously divided processes – learning design strategies/theories and instruc-
tional systems development – into a new introductory textbook. Using a holistic rather
than fragmented approach that includes top-level, mid-level, and lower-level design, this
book provides guidance for major topics such as non-instructional interventions, just-in-
time analysis, rapid-prototype approaches, and learner-centered, project-based, anytime-
anywhere instruction. Informed by the authors’ considerable experience and leadership
throughout dramatic shifts in today’s learning landscape, this book offers the next genera-
tion of instructional designers a fresh perspective that synthesizes and pushes beyond the
basics of design and development.

Charles M. Reigeluth is Professor Emeritus in the Instructional Systems Technology
Department at Indiana University, USA.

Yunjo An is Associate Professor in the Department of Learning Technologies at the
University of North Texas, USA.
Merging the Instructional Design
Process with Learner-Centered
Theory
The Holistic 4D Model



Charles M. Reigeluth and Yunjo An
First published 2021
by Routledge
52 Vanderbilt Avenue, New York, NY 10017
and by Routledge
2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon, OX14 4RN
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business
© 2021 Taylor & Francis
The right of Charles M. Reigeluth and Yunjo An to be identified as authors of this work has been
asserted by them in accordance with sections 77 and 78 of the Copyright, Designs and Patents
Act 1988.
All rights reserved. The purchase of this copyright material confers the right on the purchasing
institution to photocopy pages which bear the photocopy icon and copyright line at the bottom
of the page. No other parts of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or utilised in any
form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented,
including photocopying and recording, or in any information storage or retrieval system, without
permission in writing from the publishers.
Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks, and are
used only for identification and explanation without intent to infringe.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
A catalog record for this title has been requested
ISBN: 978-0-8153-6078-0 (hbk)
ISBN: 978-0-8153-6079-7 (pbk)
ISBN: 978-1-351-11754-8 (ebk)
Typeset in Garamond
by Deanta Global Publishing Services, Chennai, India
Contents




   Preface                                                       xi
   Acknowledgments                                              xv

1 Instructional Design                                            1
  Overview 1
     What Is Instructional Design? 1
     The “Why and How” of ID 1
     The “When and Where” of ID 2
     Quality Issues in Design and the Activity of Designing 2
     Terminology 3
  Origins of ID 4
     USA Contributions to the Origins of ID 4
     European Contributions to the Origins of ID 5
  ID Competencies and Skills 6
     ID Competencies According to ibstpi 6
     The ATD / IACET / R&A Study of ID Competencies 7
     The eLearning Guild Study 8
     A Look into the Future 8
  ID Models 9
     ADDIE Model 9
     The Dick and Carey Systems Approach Model 9
     The Morrison, Ross, and Kemp Model 10
     Rapid Prototyping 11
     Design Layering 12
     The Pebble-in-the-Pond Model 13
  Our Holistic 4D Model 13
     Holistic 13
     4D 15
     Why Should You Use the Holistic 4D Model? 16
  Where Are We? 17
  Exercises 18
  References 18
vi   Contents
UNIT 1
Define                                                                         21

 2 Define Your Project: Pre-Instructional Design                               23
   Overview 23
   Performance Analysis 23
      Performance Gap Analysis 23
      Identification of Instructional and Non-Instructional Interventions 25
   Instructional Needs Assessment 27
      Purpose 27
      Instructional Needs Assessment Process 28
   ID Project Planning 28
      What Is ID Project Planning? 28
      Guidance for ID Project Planning 30
   Planning the Instructional-System Functions 34
   Where Are We? 36
   Exercises 36
   References 36

UNIT 2
Design                                                                         39

 3 Considerations for Design: Theories of Learning and Instruction             41
   Overview 41
   Categories of Learning 41
   Learning Theories 43
      Behavioral Theory 44
      Cognitive Theory 44
      Constructivist Theory 45
   Instructional Theories 46
      Gagné’s Nine Events of Instruction and Hierarchical Sequencing 47
      Elaboration Theory 47
      First Principles of Instruction 48
      4C/ID Model 48
   Where Are We? 48
   Exercises 49
   References 50

 4 Other Considerations for Design                                             52
   Overview 52
   1. Task vs. Topic Expertise 52
   2. What to Analyze 53
      Content 54
      Learners 54
      Contexts 54
      Resources 55
   3. Just-in-Time Analysis 56
   4. Subject-Matter Experts (SMEs) 57
                                                                                 Contents vii
   5. Rapid Prototyping 58
   6. Creating a Design Document 59
   7. Instructional Approaches 59
      Competency-Based Learning 60
      Learning by Doing 60
      Case-Based Instruction (CBI) 62
      Other Approaches 62
   8. Motivational Strategies 63
   9. Media Selection 65
   Where Are We? 66
   Exercises 68
   References 68
5 Top-Level Analysis, Design, and Evaluation                                               72
  Overview 72
  1. Select and Sequence Big-Picture Content 73
     1A. Select and Sequence Big-Picture Task Expertise 73
     1B. Select and Sequence Big-Picture Topic Expertise 76
  2. Plan Big-Picture Instructional Methods 79
     Mastery 80
     Learner-Centered or Teacher-Centered Instruction 81
     Pacing 81
     Delivery Methods and Media 82
     Templates and Course Management Systems 83
  3. Formatively Evaluate, Revise, and Document the Top-Level Design 83
     Formative Evaluation and Revision 83
     Top-Level ADE Document 84
     Project Management Plan 84
  Where Are We? 84
  Exercises 86
  References 86
6 Mid-Level Analysis, Design, and Evaluation                                               88
  Overview 88
  1. Identify and Sequence Major Content for Each Task or Topic 88
     1A. For Task Expertise: Identify and Sequence Versions of Each Task 89
     1B. For Topic Expertise: Identify and Sequence Applications of Each Topic 91
  2. Identify Variations and Create Designer Objectives 93
     2A. For Task Expertise: Identify Variations within Each Version of a Task, and Create
        Designer Objectives for the Version 93
     2B. For Topic Expertise: Identify Variations within Each Application, and Create Designer
        Objectives for the Application 95
  3. Formatively Evaluate the Findings 99
  4. Develop Learner Objectives for Each Version or Application 99
  5. Design Appropriate Kinds of Learner Assessments for the Version or Application 101
     Criterion-Referenced vs. Norm-Referenced Assessments 101
     Performance vs. Predictive Assessments 102
     Characteristics of Assessments 102
     Develop Assessments 103
viii    Contents
       6. Design the Ways That Learning by Doing Will Be Accomplished 103
          6A. For Task Expertise: Design the Ways Learning by Doing Will Be Accomplished for Each
              Version 103
          6B. For Topic Expertise: Design the Ways Learning by Doing Will Be Accomplished for Each
              Application 105
       7. Select Media in General for the Version or Application 106
          Types of Media 106
          Rules for Media Selection 108
          Other Considerations 109
       8. Formatively Evaluate Your Designs and Revise Your Project Management Plan 110
          Formatively Evaluate and Revise Your Designs with Experts 110
          Update Your Project Management Plan 110
       Where Are We? 110
       Exercises 112
       References 114

 7 Lower-Level Analysis, Design, and Evaluation                                               115
   Overview 115
   1. Select and Sequence the Organizing Content 115
      1A. For Task Expertise: Select and Sequence the Organizing Content 115
      1B. For Topic Expertise: Select and Sequence the Organizing Content 122
   2. Select and Classify the Supporting Content for Each Task or Topic 128
      Identify All Important Supporting Content Down to Entry Level, and Note the Kind of Learning
          and Criteria for Mastery for Each 128
   3. Sequence the Supporting Content for Each Version or Topic 129
      3.1. Add the Supporting Content to Your Sequence of Organizing Content 129
      3.2. Adjust the Size of the Learning Session 130
   4. Formatively Evaluate and Document the Findings 132
   5. Identify Resource Requirements, Availability, and Existing Instruction for Each
      Version or Topic 132
      5.1. Estimate Resource Requirements for Implementing the Instruction 132
      5.2. Estimate Resource Requirements for the ID Project 132
   6. Revise and Elaborate the Instruction, Media, and Assessments for Each Version or
      Topic 134
      6.1. Select Appropriate Instructional Formats and Tailor Media Selections to
            Each Format 134
      6.2. Design the Scaffolding (Coaching and Instructing), and Tailor Media Selections to Each
            Scaffold 134
      6.3. Design the Motivational Support 137
      6.4. Design the Assessments 137
   7. Formatively Evaluate the ADE Document 138
   8. Begin Developing the Implementation Plan, and Update the Project Management
      Plan 139
   Where Are We? 139
   Exercises 140
   References 141
                                                                             Contents ix
 8 Lower Level ADE: Instructional Strategies for Just-in-Time Tutorials             143
   Overview 143
   1. Remember Information 144
      Primary Strategies 145
      Secondary Strategies 146
      Control Strategies 146
   2. Understand Conceptual and Theoretical Relationships 146
      2.1 Understand Causal Relationships 147
      2.2 Understand Natural Process Relationships 150
      2.3 Understand Conceptual Relationships 152
   3. Apply Skills and Higher-Order Skills 153
      Primary Strategies 154
      Secondary Strategies 155
      Control Strategies 155
   4. Act on Attitudes or Values 156
      Primary Strategies 157
      Secondary Strategies 157
   Where Are We? 157
   Exercises 158
   References 159

UNIT 3
Develop                                                                             161

 9 Development                                                                      163
   Overview 163
   The Development Process Varies Depending on the Type of Instruction 163
   Developing Instruction for LCI 164
   Producing Instructional Media 165
      Factors to Consider 166
      Activities to Do 166
      Development Tools 166
   Scriptwriting and Storyboarding 167
   General Guidelines for Graphic Design 168
   Guidelines for Developing Technology-Enhanced Instruction 169
   Developing a Learner Guide 169
   Developing an Instructor Guide 171
   Formative Evaluation, Revision, and Finalization 171
   Where Are We? 172
   Exercises 172
   References 173

10 Formative Evaluation                                                             174
   Overview 174
   Developing a Formative Evaluation Plan 174
     Formative Product Evaluation Plan 175
     Formative Process Evaluation Plan 175
x   Contents
    Conducting a Formative Product Evaluation 176
       Expert Reviews 176
       Individual Tryouts 177
       Small-Group Tryouts for Group-Based Instruction 180
       Operational Formative Product Evaluation 181
       Alpha and Beta Tests for e-Learning 183
    Using the Kirkpatrick Model for Formative Evaluation 183
       Level 1: Evaluating Participant Reaction 184
       Level 2: Evaluating Learning 184
       Levels 3 and 4: Evaluating Behavior and Results 184
    Conducting a Formative Process Evaluation 186
    Where Are We? 187
    Exercises 187
    References 187

UNIT 4
Deploy                                                         189

11 Implementation                                              191
   Overview 191
   The Four Functions for Implementation 191
     Delivery Function 191
     Support Function 191
     Evaluation Function 192
     Management Function 192
   Additional Guidance 193
     Implementing Instructor-Present Instruction 193
     Implementing Instructor-Free e-Learning 194
   Where Are We? 194
   Exercises 194
12 Summative Evaluation                                        195
   Overview 195
   Using the Kirkpatrick Model for Summative Evaluation 196
      Level 1: Evaluating Participant Reaction 196
      Level 2: Evaluating Learning 197
      Level 3: Evaluating Behaviors 197
      Level 4: Evaluating Results 205
   Where Are We? 205
   Exercises 206
   References 206

    Afterword                                                  207
    Appendix                                                   209
    Index                                                      219
Preface




Since the beginning of this millennium, knowledge about learning, instructional strategies,
technological tools, and instructional design (ID) processes has advanced considerably,
but most ID process models have not kept pace. This prompted the US Air Force to hire
one of us for a year to update their ID process model. The result was a model with many
novel features to greatly improve the effectiveness and efficiency of the ID process and
the resulting instruction. Building on the Air Force model, we have created a new model,
called the Holistic 4D Model, that takes a holistic approach to the ID process and is organ-
ized into four major activities: Define, Design, Develop, and Deploy. Its most notable
features include:

 1.   A holistic design process
 2.   Analysis-design-evaluation (ADE) cycles and design document templates
 3.   Integration with instructional theory
 4.   Teaching topic and task expertise
 5.   Holistic instructional sequences
 6.   Learner-centered instruction
 7.   Non-instructional interventions
 8.   Rapid prototyping
 9.   Designer objectives and demonstration objectives
10.   Product and process evaluations

Each of these is described next.

1. Holistic design process. To address the problem of fragmented and “cookie cutter”
instruction, the Holistic 4D Model uses a holistic design process. Rather than beginning
the design process by analyzing the content into small pieces and designing instruction for
each of those pieces, it begins with a top-level ADE that creates a fuzzy vision of both
the content and methods, followed by a mid-level ADE that works out more details on
the fuzzy vision, and finally a lower-level ADE is conducted that fills in all the details for
both content and methods. This allows for more creativity in the design process and more
coherence in the resulting instruction.

2. ADE cycles and design document templates. When an ID project tries to complete
all the analysis before doing any design, some things get analyzed that are not needed, and
some things that are needed are not analyzed. Also, memories fade when a lot of time
passes between the analysis and the use of its results in design. Therefore, the Holistic 4D
xii   Preface
Model offers guidance for just-in-time (JIT) analysis. Similarly, it helps to do some forma-
tive evaluation of each design decision as soon as possible, so any improvements can be
incorporated into future design decisions. Thus, we offer guidance for cycles of ADE
that uses JIT analysis and immediate evaluation for your design decisions. We also offer
templates for ADE on the top, mid, and lower levels of design. These templates greatly
facilitate the process of documenting the results of the design process, including important
analysis and formative evaluation results.

3. Integration with instructional theory. The biggest influence on the quality of the
instruction you design is the instructional methods you choose. Therefore, instructional
theory is integrated into the Holistic 4D Model. That integration improves the efficiency
of the ID process and the effectiveness of the resulting instruction.

4. Teaching topic and task expertise. Due to its behaviorist roots, most ID models
look at all that is to be learned as tasks, so the primary analysis is task analysis. That works
well in most training contexts, but not so well in many educational contexts where topics
reign supreme. Analysis and design activities need to be quite different when the learning
is focused on topic expertise. The Holistic 4D Model provides guidance for developing
both task and topic expertise.

5. Holistic instructional sequences. Schema theory has helped us understand that
learning is improved when it occurs within a meaningful context of broader and more
inclusive knowledge. Hierarchical sequences that begin with small, component skills and
proceed to combine them into ever-larger skills violate this important principle of learning.
The Holistic 4D Model provides guidance for designing holistic instructional sequences
that don’t ignore the existence of learning prerequisites – for both task and topic expertise.

6. Learner-centered instruction. There is growing recognition of the power of learning
by doing (project-based, problem-based, inquiry-based, maker-based, task-based learn-
ing), as well as competency-based, personalized, collaborative, self-directed, and anytime-
anywhere instruction, yet the guidance for designing such learner-centered instruction is
sketchy. Therefore, the Holistic 4D Model includes guidance for designing such instruc-
tion, thereby helping designers to make their instruction more motivational and effective.

7. Non-instructional interventions. The Holistic 4D Model includes guidance about
how to identify non-instructional interventions to improve performance, thereby enhanc-
ing performance and avoiding the development of instruction when other interventions
are more effective – or the development of instruction alone when it should be accompa-
nied by other interventions.

8. Rapid prototyping. The model also includes guidance for using either of two kinds
of rapid prototyping – qualitative reduction or quantitative reduction – thereby increasing
the efficiency of the ID process.

9. Designer objectives and demonstration objectives. Designers use objectives to
help guide the design of their instruction, and learners sometimes benefit from objec-
tives to help guide their learning. The problem is that different kinds of information are
needed for these two different purposes. The Holistic 4D Model provides guidance for
the design of these two very different types of objectives. Furthermore, objectives are
                                                                                   Preface   xiii
typically abstract to learners and thereby not very helpful. Therefore, we provide guidance
for designing a more concrete and useful kind of objective that we call a demonstration
objective.

10. Product and process evaluations. It is important to conduct formative evaluations
of the instruction you are designing, but it is also important to conduct formative evalua-
tions of the ID process you are using. The Holistic 4D Model provides guidance for both
kinds of evaluation and when to do them throughout the ID process, not just at the end.
Of course, it also provides guidance for summative evaluation after the instructional sys-
tem is implemented.

    This book is intended for three audiences: (1) practicing instructional designers, to
guide their design efforts, (2) students of instructional design, to help them learn how to
be good instructional designers, and (3) teachers, instructors, and trainers, to help them
design and develop leaner-centered instruction. Supporting resources are available at www
.reigeluth.net/holistic-4d.
    Chapter 1 addresses what instructional design is, its origins, why it is important, and
what kinds of skills are needed to be a good instructional designer. Next, it provides a brief
introduction to some of the most well-known ID models. Finally, it provides an overview
of our updated ID model, the Holistic 4D Model – Define, Design, Develop, Deploy.

Define
Chapter 2 describes activities that are important to conduct before you begin the ID
process. They include performance analysis (to identify any organizational performance
problems and decide what kinds of interventions will best address them, including both
instructional and non-instructional interventions), instructional needs assessment (to iden-
tify what needs to be taught – major instructional goals), project planning (to develop
a project management plan for the ID process), and instructional system planning (to
develop a plan to carry out all the instructional system functions after the instruction has
been developed).

Design
Chapter 3 introduces readers to categories of learning and explains their importance in
determining which instructional methods are likely to be most effective for any given
instructional situation. It then provides a brief description of learning theories (behavioral,
cognitive, and constructivist), followed by a few of the best-known instructional theories.
   Chapter 4 describes nine major considerations for one to keep in mind during the ID
process: (1) the distinction between task expertise and topic expertise, (2) the diverse kinds
of analysis that one must conduct, (3) the concept of just-in-time analysis, (4) the role of
subject-matter experts, (5) the two kinds of rapid prototyping, (6) the nature of a design
document, (7) the variety of learner-centered and teacher-centered approaches to instruc-
tion, (8) motivational strategies, and (9) media selection.
   Chapter 5 offers detailed guidance for three major ADE activities on the “top level” of
our Holistic 4D Model – the level on which you create a “fuzzy vision” of the instruction,
including a top-level view of the content, sequence, and instructional methods, along with
indication of when to do formative evaluation and revision during those activities.
xiv Preface
   Chapter 6 provides detailed guidance for eight major ADE activities on the “mid level”
of our model – the level on which you provide the next level of clarity about the vision,
including the mid-level content, sequence, objectives, assessments, instructional methods,
and media for both task expertise and topic expertise, each of which requires somewhat
different guidance. It also indicates when to do formative evaluation and revision during
those activities.
   Chapters 7 and 8 provide detailed guidance for eight major ADE activities on the
“lower level” of our model – the level on which you provide the final level of clarity
about the vision, including content, sequence, and instructional methods, based on
resources and existing instruction, for both task expertise and topic expertise. Specifically,
Chapter 8 provides guidance for designing just-in-time tutorials. They also indicate when
to do formative evaluation and revision during those activities. And they conclude with
guidance for developing the implementation plan and updating the project management
plan.

Develop
Chapter 9 provides major considerations and detailed guidance for the third D, Developing
the instruction. Some development occurs periodically during the design process. The
development process varies depending on many factors, which are discussed, along with
guidance for producing instructional media, scriptwriting and storyboarding, graphic
design, developing technology-enhanced instruction, and developing a learner guide and
an instructor guide. The chapter also emphasizes the importance of frequent evaluation
and revisions during the development process.
   Chapter 10 provides major considerations and detailed guidance for conducting ongo-
ing formative evaluation of both the instructional design and the ID process throughout
the ID process. References to these formative evaluation activities appear throughout the
guidance in Chapters 5–9, showing the iterative and recursive nature of the ID process.

Deploy
Chapter 11 provides detailed guidance for the fourth D (Deploy) in our Holistic 4D
Model. It includes guidance for ensuring that the delivery, management, and support func-
tions of an instructional system are operating well.
   Chapter 12 provides detailed guidance for conducting summative evaluation of the
instructional system.


An Afterword provides some concluding remarks.
   An Appendix provides all the templates or forms offered in this book, as a conveni-
ence for you to photocopy. Also, Word documents for those templates and forms are
available at www.reigeluth.net/holistic-4d.
   The authors welcome suggestions for improving the next edition of this book. Please
contact them at reigelut@indiana.edu or yunjo.an@unt.edu.
Acknowledgments




This book – a combination of textbook and job aid – has been extensively formatively
evaluated by 11 professionals, who are either full-time instructional developers, professors
of instructional design, or a combination of the two. We would like to thank them (listed
below) for their expert review of an earlier manuscript of the book.
   We would like to thank Katherine Burk and Wendy Johnson of the U.S. Air Force Air
Education and Training Command for their contributions to early ideas for this book.
   We would also like to thank Alexander Romiszowski for his review and comments
on early drafts of the book and for his contribution of some personal experiences and case
examples which we have included in the first four chapters.

Janet Annelli
Sinem Aslan
Brian Beatty
Pratima Dutta
Jake Enfield
Herb Fiester
Melissa Goodrum
John Keller
Minkyoung Kim
Seolim Kwon
Kurt Richter
1      Instructional Design




Overview
What Is Instructional Design?
Instructional design (ID) is a deliberate and orderly, but flexible, process for planning,
analyzing, designing, developing, implementing, and evaluating instruction in education or
training settings, formal and informal.
   Design and development are confusing terms because they have both a macro and a
micro sense. As we just stated, the ID process involves activities that are called design and
development, among others. But the ID process also needs a name, and unfortunately it is
called the instructional development process by some people and the instructional design
process by others. So, “design” and “development” are terms that can refer to the whole
process (a macro meaning) or to one kind of activity within the process (a micro meaning).
The context will (or should) indicate the correct meaning.
   To further complicate matters, the whole process is referred to by some people as
instructional design and by others as instructional development or, alternatively, instruc-
tional systems design or instructional systems development (ISD). Since the activity of
design is what largely determines the nature of the instruction, we view it as the “key”
activity of the ID process and therefore prefer to call the overall process the instructional
design process, but from now on we just refer to it as the ID process.
   In practice, design should always lead to development (unless the design process is just
an intellectual exercise). Similarly, development of a product should always be preceded by
design. And development (with subsequent evaluation) may often lead back to (re)design
of some aspects of the original design. We must therefore expect design and development
activities to interact, each influencing the other. But as you read through the later chapters,
you will study the nature of these two activities separately: design in Chapters 5–8 and
development in Chapter 9. Please keep in mind that in practice they are done interactively
and recursively.

The “Why and How” of ID
A lot of knowledge has been developed about how people learn (learning science) and
how best to help people learn (instructional science), as we discuss in Chapter 3. A lot
has also been learned about the process for using that knowledge to create high-quality
instruction – to help people learn more effectively, efficiently, and motivationally, as we
discuss in Chapter 4. ID utilizes both these kinds of knowledge, and ID models and design
theories offer them in the form of practical guidance for instructional designers.
2   Instructional Design
    Instructors often approach the design of instruction from a content perspective – that
is, what to teach. In contrast, instructional designers approach the task from a problem-solv-
ing perspective that includes what to teach but pays considerable attention to how to teach it
in a way that is effective, efficient, and motivational. Instruction – the process of helping
others to learn something new – can sometimes be straightforward, such as demonstrating
the steps of a simple procedure followed by supervised practice. But other times, when
the topic is complex and the learners may be ill-prepared to understand it, deciding how
best to teach it may be a complex, ill-structured problem that doesn’t have a single correct
solution – there are usually many possibilities.
    How can the designer find a good design from all the many possibilities? In general,
there is no well-defined, or “algorithmic,” procedure that is guaranteed to lead to a good
solution. Designers have to apply “heuristics” for solving their problems. A heuristic is a
rule or general principle which, if applied, works most of the time, but it may sometimes
fail and is often incomplete or imprecise (see Table 1.1 for examples). Therefore, heuristic
problem-solving is an iterative process – it involves analysis, design, evaluation, and then
(if necessary) further loops of analysis, design, and evaluation. ID is a method for solving
such problems – a method for deciding how best to teach given content to given target
learners under given sets of practical and contextual conditions.
    Instructional designers first define the problem; second determine what knowledge,
skills, and attitudes need to be taught, focusing on what the learner needs to know and
be able to do; and third determine the methods that will best help the learner to master
that content. In training contexts, organizations often waste lots of resources by devel-
oping instruction that requires employees to spend extra hours away from the job to
learn content that ends up having little or no impact on performance. Well-designed
instruction makes learning more effective, efficient, and motivating, saves time and
money, improves performance, and increases employee satisfaction. In education con-
texts, ID helps teachers better meet learners’ needs, motivate them, and accelerate their
learning.
    Design problems, in most contexts, usually have many possible solutions – and ID is no
exception. This is what makes design exciting, challenging, and rewarding.

The “When and Where” of ID
ID can be applied in any context in which people engage in purposeful learning, formal or
informal. Table 1.2 provides some general examples of ID projects in different contexts.

Quality Issues in Design and the Activity of Designing
To understand quality in the context of ID, let us look at common features and recurring
themes found in many different design contexts. A good design is one that appropriately
answers a requirement or meets a stated need. Good design also anticipates and satisfies
the “needs and wants” of the clients (those who request the project) and the consumers of


Table 1.1 Examples of Heuristics
One heuristic used in solving problems with many possible solutions is to reduce the options by asking
  questions that may identify and eliminate inadequate or inappropriate solutions before beginning to
  investigate the remaining possibilities.
Another heuristic often used by designers is to see if there is already a solution to a similar problem that
  can be adopted or adapted to the problem under analysis (with permission, as appropriate).
                                                                                      Instructional Design 3

Table 1.2 Examples of ID Projects in Diverse Contexts

Context              Examples of ID Projects
P-12 Education       Help teachers design technology-enhanced lessons
                     Design and develop multimedia learning resources
                     Design online projects for high school students
Higher Education     Design and develop training materials for faculty and staff
                     Help faculty improve courses
                     Help faculty adapt their face-to-face courses to online project-based courses
Business             Design online training for employees or external clients
                     Design on-the-job training
                     Develop job aids
                     Design classroom training or workshops
Healthcare           Design training for healthcare professionals (e.g., doctors, nurses, nurse practitioners,
                        pharmacists)
                     Create patient education resources
Military             Design and develop training courses for soldiers
                     Design and develop military games and simulations
Informal Learning    Design and develop game-based projects for tasks of general interest
                     Design and develop instruction and assessments for popular digital badges



the final product (the target learners). This has been jokingly described as the “dog food
syndrome”: the issue of designing a solution that satisfies both whoever uses/consumes
it and also whoever chooses and pays for it. Sometimes, these are one and the same, but
very frequently they are not.
    To be a good designer in any field means using skills (researching, creating, testing),
knowledge (about things, people, principles), abilities (e.g., time planning and manage-
ment), and sensitivities (to values, contexts, markets, aesthetics, elegance, beauty, etc.).
Good ID also involves knowledge about human learning, perception and acquisition of
skills, attitudes and values, and information about the content to be learned.

Terminology
Instruction, education, and training. While the meanings of education and training are
fairly universally understood, the term “instruction” is understood differently in different
parts of the world. In the USA, it is typically defined in terms of “activities that promote
learning” and is used in both education and training contexts. In the United Kingdom,
however, it tends to be understood only as training – what happens in military, industrial,
and animal contexts – rather than what happens in schools or colleges. Other countries
and cultures have yet different terms. France translates “instructional design” as “concep-
tion pédagogique” (pedagogical design). In the 1970s, Brazil used the term “planejamento
pedagógico” (pedagogical planning), but the currently accepted technical term is “design
instructional” (Romiszowski & Romiszowski, 2005).
   Technology. Technology has become one of the most frequently used – and most
often misused or misunderstood – terms, not only in education or training but in just about
any context. In general, technology is applied knowledge, but it takes two forms: hard and
soft technology. Hard technology refers to equipment, such as computers, mobile devices,
and such. Soft technology refers to knowledge, such as methods, processes, and principles.
4   Instructional Design
    We offer two pieces of advice about terminology:

 1. Make sure you really understand the meaning of terms as used by others
 2. Reflect on how you would ensure that others with whom you work share the same
    understanding of the terms you use


Origins of ID
USA Contributions to the Origins of ID
During the Second World War, the USA military needed to train a large number of
untrained draftees in a very short period of time. In the words of Robert Gagné,
they had to “transform farm boys into airplane mechanics in thirty days instead of
two years” (Munzenmaier, 2014, p. 6). Several psychologists and educators, including
Robert Gagné, Leslie Briggs, and John Flanagan, were called on to conduct research
and develop training materials for the military services. Most tasks to be trained were
physical ones (e.g., operating military equipment), and the behavioral approach (e.g.,
breaking a task into small steps, providing practice and reinforcement) was ideal for the
situation.
    The success of the behavioral approach led to ongoing research into behavioral objec-
tives and programmed instruction during the 1950s and 1960s. Many of the psychologists
who were responsible for the military training and research during the war continued to
do pioneering work in the ID field (Reiser, 2001, 2018). But ID has morphed considerably
since then, due to advances in cognitive science, constructivism, learning sciences, and dig-
ital technologies. We shall address these topics when relevant in later chapters. However,
a general review of some of this early work provides a broader context for understanding
the rise of ID as a discipline and profession.
    One important contributor to both the theory and the practice of ID in those early
days was Professor B.F. Skinner. Although much of his research both before and
immediately after the Second World War was laboratory-based experimentation on the
principles of “operant conditioning” using a variety of animals (and sometimes also
humans) as experimental subjects, from the 1950s onward he also devoted effort to
defining and applying research-based principles and procedures for effective instruc-
tion in classroom settings and for the systematic design and development of self-
instructional materials to be used in educational and training contexts (programmed
instruction). In a paper entitled The Science of Learning and the Art of Teaching, Skinner
(1954) summarized the potential impact of the results of his research and development
activities as follows:

     From this exciting prospect of an advancing science of learning, it is a great shock
     to turn to that branch of technology which is most directly concerned with the
     learning process – education. … [T]he advances which have recently been made
     in our control of the learning process suggest a thorough revision of classroom
     practices and, fortunately, they tell us how the revision can be brought about. This
     is not, of course, the first time that the results of an experimental science have been
     brought to bear upon the practical problems of education. The modern classroom
     does not, however, offer much evidence that research in the field of learning has
     been respected or used.
                                                                                 (pp. 90–91)
                                                                         Instructional Design 5
Ten years later, in a paper entitled The Technology of Teaching, Skinner (1968) presents his
views and proposals for the improvement of instruction – and much more. He opens as
follows:

    More than sixty years ago, William James (1899) in Talks to Teachers on Psychology,
    said: “You make a great mistake, if you think that psychology, being the science
    of the mind’s laws, is something from which you can deduce definite programs,
    schemes and methods of instruction for schoolroom use. Psychology is a science,
    and teaching is an art; and sciences never generate arts directly out of themselves.
    An intermediary inventive mind must make the application, by using its originality.”
                                                                                 (p. 59)

Skinner then argues that the “intermediary inventive mind” which James called for is an
educational or instructional “technologist.”
    Skinner (1968) included this paper as chapter 4 in an 11-chapter book with the same
title, in which he outlines how the behavioral sciences are the basis for procedures
that may not only transform teaching (aka instruction), but also develop in the learner
such competencies as productive thinking, creativity, motivation to learn, discipline,
ethical behavior, and self-control – and, in addition, principles and procedures for
the organization and management of the “establishment” (i.e., schools, colleges, etc.).

European Contributions to the Origins of ID
Considerations about “what to teach” and “how to teach it” have, of course, existed ever
since the birth of formal education. The ancient Greeks – Plato and Aristotle among oth-
ers – wrote books devoted to these issues, and the birth of a scientific approach to the study
of teaching and learning dates from the 17th century. John Amos Comenius (1592–1670)
was a philosopher, pedagogue, and theologian considered by some as the “father of modern
education” (see Figure 1.1). He was born in Central Europe but travelled and worked in
many other countries across Europe. His native language was German, but being a scholar
and theologian, he was obliged by the norms of the time to use Latin as an academic working
language. However, he introduced school textbooks profusely illustrated with pictures and
diagrams and written in native languages instead of Latin. He introduced many other inno-
vations, including teaching procedures based on gradual development from simpler to more
complex concepts, curriculum focused on logical thinking and problem-solving, educational
opportunities for women and the economically disadvantaged, and lifelong learning.
   Comenius was also one of the first champions of universal education, a concept he
described in his book, Didactica Magna, published in 1638.1 This book introduced didactics
as the theory of teaching and defined it in a less formal and wider sense as the practi-
cal application of the science of teaching. Comenius also contrasted “didactica” with
“mathetica,” a term he derived from the classical Greek word for learning and defined as
“the science of learning.” Soon, many Central European schools of education founded
departments of didactics. In time, most European nations and many in other parts of the
world (e.g., Latin America) followed suit – but not the Anglo-Saxon world. Universities
in the UK and USA founded similar departments in terms of their academic focus,
but with different names (e.g., teaching theory and practice in the UK; curriculum and


1   For an English translation, see Comenius (1907).
6   Instructional Design




Figure 1.1 John Amos Comenius.


instruction in the USA). In the past, these academic communities did not interact much
with European didactics, but times have changed. The current situation is well illustrated
by a recent conference.
   The International Commission on Mathematical Instruction (ICMI) is a part of the
International Mathematical Union, an internationally acting organization founded
in 1908 at an International Congress in Rome. It was a relatively small, Europe-based
organization until the 1950s, when it expanded worldwide to over 90 member countries,
including the USA and most of the Americas. Since the 1960s, the ICMI has organized an
International Congress on Mathematics Education every four years.

ID Competencies and Skills
In this section of the chapter, we examine several research-based lists of the competencies
and skills that have been identified as required to effectively and efficiently perform ID –
and also manage the development and implementation phases of ID projects. Because of
the broad range of skills, ID projects typically involve a team of people. We also “look into
the future” of how these competency profiles may change.

ID Competencies According to ibstpi
In 1986, the International Board of Standards for Training, Performance, and Instruction
(ibstpi), a not-for-profit corporation with up to 15 board members, published the first
                                                                                       Instructional Design 7
set of ID competencies. The latest ibstpi (2012) ID competencies are composed of
22 competencies clustered into five domains (see Table 1.3):

•   Professional foundations
•   Planning and analysis
•   Design and development
•   Evaluation and implementation
•   Management

The competencies are also categorized as essential (for all instructional designers), advanced
(for experienced instructional designers), and managerial (for managers of ID teams).

The ATD / IACET / R&A Study of ID Competencies
Through a partnership between the Association for Talent Development (ATD), the
International Association for Continuing Education and Training (IACET), and Rothwell
& Associates (R&A), a research team conducted a study to examine the ID competencies

Table 1.3 2012 ibstpi ID Competencies

Domain                     Competencies                                                      Level of Expertise
Professional Foundations   1.   Communicate effectively in visual, oral, and written form    Essential
                           2.   Apply research and theory to the discipline of ID            Advanced
                           3.   Update and improve knowledge, skills, and attitudes          Essential
                                pertaining to the ID process and related fields
                           4.   Apply data collection and analysis skills in ID projects     Advanced
                           5.   Identify and respond to ethical, legal, and political        Essential
                                implications of design in the workplace
Planning and Analysis      6.   Conduct a needs assessment in order to recommend             Advanced
                                appropriate design solutions and strategies
                           7.   Identify and describe target population and                  Essential
                                environmental characteristics
                           8.   Select and use analysis techniques for determining           Essential
                                instructional content
                           9.   Analyze the characteristics of existing and emerging         Essential
                                technologies and their potential use
Design and Development 10. Use an ID process appropriate for a given project                 Essential
                       11. Organize instructional programs and/or products to be             Essential
                           designed, developed, and evaluated
                       12. Design instructional interventions                                Essential
                       13. Plan non-instructional interventions                              Advanced
                       14. Select or modify existing instructional materials                 Essential
                       15. Develop instructional materials                                   Essential
                       16. Design learning assessment                                        Advanced
Evaluation and             17. Evaluate instructional and non-instructional interventions Advanced
  Implementation           18. Revise instructional and non-instructional solutions based Essential
                               on data
                           19. Implement, disseminate, and diffuse instructional and      Advanced
                               non-instructional interventions
Management                 20. Apply business skills to managing the ID function             Managerial
                           21. Manage partnerships and collaborative relationships           Managerial
                           22. Plan and manage ID projects                                   Advanced
8     Instructional Design
most valued by instructional designers themselves (ATD Research, 2015). When asked
which skills are most important to the role of instructional designer, participants selected
soft skills, such as critical thinking and interpersonal skills. Technology skills (e.g., coding,
programming, graphic design) were deemed less important, perhaps because designers
often work with technology experts when such special skills are needed. The top ten skills
identified were:

 1.    Skill to not only listen but also synthesize what’s being said
 2.    Analytical skills
 3.    Knowledge of ID principles, practices, and adult learning theory
 4.    Organization, prioritization, time management skill
 5.    Writing skills
 6.    Interpersonal skills
 7.    Attention to detail
 8.    Project management
 9.    Lifelong learner, the hunger to learn new things
10.    Customer service skills

The eLearning Guild Study
The eLearning Guild identified the skills most desired by managers advertising for instruc-
tional designers through the content analysis of 60 job advertisements for instructional
designers placed on Indeed.com during June 2014 (Munzenmaier, 2014). The results of
the content analysis showed that the most desired skills were:

•     Evaluate courses
•     Manage projects
•     Collaborate with subject-matter experts (SMEs)
•     Conduct needs analysis
•     Develop content
•     Write objectives
•     Manage courses
•     Document/administer courses

A Look into the Future
The roles of instructional designers are continually evolving to meet the needs of changing
knowledge, tools, and environments for learning. Keep in mind that the roles and respon-
sibilities of instructional designers may vary depending on where they are (e.g., different
countries, different settings, different organizations) and the nature of the ID project. For
example, some instructional designers design and develop a wide variety of instructional
materials – from simple job aids to classroom training to e-learning courses to game-based
learning – while others focus on a very specific type of instruction (e.g., e-learning or
games). Further, some instructional designers are required to play multiple roles in the ID
process (e.g., project manager, instructional designer, graphics designer, developer), while
others focus on design and work in one role, with many other specialized professionals in
a large team.
    More recently, several authors, in commenting on the accelerating rate of tech-
nological change, have proposed and described the emerging role of learning engineer
                                                                      Instructional Design 9
(Saxberg & Hess, 2013; Saxberg, 2015; Educause, 2018; Lieberman, 2018; Wagner,
2019), offered by Simon in 1967. The main reason for proposing this role is that nowa-
days instructional designers are dealing with an ever-growing and increasingly complex
list of tasks due to the appearance and use of new digital tools and technologies. These
authors suggest that learning engineers, by using knowledge and skills from scientific
disciplines such as data science, computer science, and learning science, would support
and complement the work of instructional designers and ID project managers and
may also help learners and instructors to obtain more benefits from new learning tech-
nologies. But if we have learning engineers, then why not also learning architects? We
believe that these terms reflect the evolution of skills in roles that are already defined
by ibstpi and others.

ID Models
A number of ID models have been developed to guide instructional designers and trainers
in the ID process. Here, we only briefly describe a few of the best-known models. A com-
prehensive list and descriptions can be found elsewhere (see e.g., Dills & Romiszowski,
1997; Gustafson & Branch, 2002).

ADDIE Model
One of the most commonly used terms in the ID field is “the ADDIE model.” ADDIE
is an acronym for Analysis, Design, Development, Implementation, and Evaluation.
Although the origin of the label is unknown, ADDIE has been widely used by ID prac-
titioners as a model for ID. It is generally agreed that ADDIE is an illustration of the
generic, essential steps of the ID process (Molenda, 2003; Reiser & Dempsey, 2002). A
number of adaptations of ADDIE have been developed. Figure 1.2 shows one.

The Dick and Carey Systems Approach Model
The Dick, Carey, and Carey (2014) model is a well-known ID model that uses a systems
approach to the design of instruction (see Figure 1.3). In this model, the ID process is
viewed as a system, and the components of the system, including the learners, the instruc-
tor, the instructional materials, and the learning environment, interact with one another




Figure 1.2 The ADDIE Model.
10 Instructional Design




Figure 1.3 The Dick and Carey Model.


and work together to achieve the goal of learning. The systems approach model consists
of the following interconnected components:

•   Identify instructional goal(s)
•   Conduct instructional analysis
•   Analyze learners and contexts
•   Write performance objectives
•   Develop assessment instruments
•   Develop instructional strategy
•   Develop and select instructional materials
•   Design and conduct formative evaluation of instruction
•   Revise instruction
•   Design and conduct summative evaluation

The Morrison, Ross, and Kemp Model
The Morrison, Ross, Kalman, and Kemp (2010) ID model is composed of the following
nine elements (see Figure 1.4):

•   Instructional Problems: identify the need of the client or the performance problem
    the client wishes to solve
•   Learner Characteristics: define the characteristics of the target audience
•   Task Analysis: determine what knowledge and procedures you need to include in the
    instruction to help the learner master the objectives
•   Instructional Objectives: specify exactly what the learner must master
•   Content Sequencing: sequence content in a logical order
•   Instructional Strategies: design creative ways of presenting the information that help
    the learner integrate the new information with ideas they already understand
•   Designing the Message: select appropriate graphics, text, and typographical design to
    enhance the readability and the learner’s understanding of the instruction
                                                                      Instructional Design 11




Figure 1.4 The Morrison, Ross, and Kemp Model.

•   Development of Instruction: put all the parts together to produce instructional
    materials
•   Evaluation Instruments: assess the learner’s mastery of the objectives

In addition to these nine elements, the Morrison, Ross, and Kemp model includes eight
processes that are ongoing throughout the life of an ID project: planning, project manage-
ment, support services, formative evaluation, revision, implementation, summative evalu-
ation, and confirmative evaluation.

Rapid Prototyping
Critics argue that traditional approaches to ID are too linear, too slow, overly analyti-
cal, and inflexible (e.g., Zemke & Rossett, 2002). In response to these criticisms, rapid
prototyping (see Figure 1.5) was proposed to reduce the time and cost of an ID project,
while increasing effectiveness and flexibility. Rapid prototyping is a non-linear, iterative
approach that is characterized by the “parallel processes of design and research, or con-
struction and utilization” (Tripp & Bichelmeyer, 1990, p. 37). Basically, it produces the
prototype of a part of the whole instruction and allows the client to see early in the pro-
cess what the completed instruction will look like and how it will work (Piskurich, 2015),
whereas in the traditional ID process the client does not see the product until the whole
instruction is almost completed. Since the prototype is developed and presented early in
the process, the client is able to provide more detailed feedback and formative recom-
mendations early and frequently in the ID process, which can result in customized design
12 Instructional Design




Figure 1.5 Rapid Prototyping.


and lower development costs. Rapid prototyping is particularly effective for large-scale,
technology-based projects.

Design Layering
Brand (1994) describes the design of a building in terms of multiple coordinated and
integrated sub-designs, which he calls layers. According to Brand, virtually all modern
buildings are composed of six layers (the six Ss: site, structure, skin, services, space plan,
and stuff). Based on the philosophy that designed artifacts can be characterized in terms
of decomposable functional “layers,” Gibbons and Rogers (2009) proposed a layered
approach to ID. Specifically, they identified and described the following seven design lay-
ers of an instructional design:

•    Content layer: a design must specify the structures of the content to be taught
•    Strategy layer: a design must specify the physical organization of the learning space,
     social organizations of participants, their roles and responsibilities, instructional goals,
     allocation of goals to timed event structures, and strategic patterns of interaction
     between the learner and the instructional experience
•    Message layer: a design must specify the tactical language of message structures
     through which the instructional experience can communicate content-derived infor-
     mation to the learner in conversational form
•    Control layer: a design must specify the language of control structures through which
     the instructional experience can communicate content-derived information to the
     learner in conversational form
•    Representation layer: a design must specify the representations that make message
     elements visible, hearable, and otherwise sense-able
•    Media-logic layer: a design must specify the mechanism by which representations are
     caused to occur in their designed or computed sequence
•    Data management layer: a design must specify data to be captured, archived, analyzed,
     interpreted, and reported

These layers represent major functions of an instructional artifact. Gibbons and Rogers
(2009) explain that there might be more or fewer layers, depending on the insight of the
instructional designer.
                                                                        Instructional Design 13
The Pebble-in-the-Pond Model
The pebble-in-the-pond model, developed by David Merrill (2002), consists of a series of
expanding activities initiated by casting a pebble in the design pond (see Figure 1.6):

•   Specify a problem (the first ripple): specify a typical problem that represents the whole
    task that learners will be able to do following the instruction
•   Progression of problems (the second ripple): identify a progression of problems that
    gradually increase in complexity and difficulty
•   Component analysis (the third ripple): identify all the knowledge components required
    to complete each of the tasks in the progression
•   Instructional strategy (the fourth ripple): determine the instructional strategy that will
    be used to engage the learner with the content that has been specified through prob-
    lem identification, problem progression, and task analysis
•   Interface design (the fifth ripple): adapt the knowledge components and instructional
    strategy to the delivery system and instructional architecture of the learning situation
•   Production (the sixth ripple): produce the instructional materials or situation

The pebble-in-the-pond model addresses some of the major objections to traditional ID
models raised by Gordon and Zemke (2000) by developing the content first. The model is
effective for designing problem-centered instruction.

Our Holistic 4D Model
Holistic
This book offers a holistic approach to ID, which stands in contrast to the prevailing frag-
mented approach that begins with an exhaustive hierarchical analysis process that breaks
“what should be taught” down into tiny pieces and proceeds to design instruction for
each of those pieces. The holistic approach begins the design process by creating a “fuzzy
vision” of the instructional system (top-level design) and proceeds to work out progres-
sively more details for each part of it in two more cycles (mid-level and lower-level design)
so that each part is designed with the other parts in mind.
   Our holistic approach also entails doing analysis within each part of this process rather
than all at once at the beginning of the process, so that (a) designers do not get mired
in details during the initial envisioning process, (b) information gleaned from an anal-
ysis activity is used immediately for designing while it is still fresh, and (c) only useful




Figure 1.6 The Pebble-in-the-Pond Model.
14 Instructional Design
information – and all necessary information – is analyzed. We offer this approach because
there is strong evidence that it makes the resulting instructional system more effective
and less fragmented. It also makes the ID process more creative and more efficient (less
expensive and time-consuming) and makes rapid prototyping more effective and efficient.
   We propose three stages for holistic ID – an adaptation of Romiszowski’s (1981) divi-
sion of “the analysis and the instructional development procedures … into [two] levels
of detail” (pp. 81–93) and later (Romiszowski, 1986, pp. 11–12), to four levels, the fourth
being concerned with development of instructional materials rather than design. The three
levels of design that we propose are:

    1. Top-level (strategic) design to create a “fuzzy vision” of the instruction, including
       top-level content, sequence, and preliminary instructional methods
    2. Mid-level (operational) design to provide the next level of clarity about the vision
       including the mid-level sequence, objectives, assessments, and instructional methods
    3. Lower-level (tactical) design to create a detailed blueprint of the instruction including
       the lower-level objectives, assessments, and instruction for both a task focus and a
       topic focus

While it is possible to configure the design process in any number of levels (realistically,
one to perhaps six), using three levels seems to be a “happy medium” that keeps the num-
ber of design cycles manageably small while allowing for a more creative, coherent, and
efficient process.
   Each stage of design requires its own analysis:

    1. Top-level analysis identifies just enough about the course content to create the top-
       level design. The purpose of analysis during the top-level design is to begin to deter-
       mine what to teach (given the instructional goals identified in the needs assessment)
       and how to teach it. It identifies the general content that is later examined during mid-
       level analysis and allows you to create a fuzzy vision of what the instruction should be
       like for each task and/or topic. A top-level analysis is not required if all major parts of
       the content have already been identified. In such a case, you should go directly to mid-
       level analysis.
    2. Mid-level analysis identifies just enough more about the content to elaborate it to a
       mid-level design. Having identified general information about what to teach and the
       general instructional methods in the top-level analysis, you will have a meaningful
       context within which to gather more detailed information about what to teach and
       how to teach it for each task and/or each topic listed.
    3. Lower-level analysis identifies details about the kinds of learning involved in order
       to elaborate the design to a detailed blueprint of the instruction. Different kinds of
       learning require different kinds of mental processing for learning to occur, which
       in turn require different methods of instruction to foster those cognitive processes.
       Therefore, it is important to analyze each version2 of a task and each subtopic of a
       topic in order to identify the different kinds of learning and consequently the differ-
       ent methods of instruction that will be most helpful for mastering the content.


2     A version of a task is one of several classes of ways that a complex task is performed in the real world. A simple task
      typically has a single version. The more complex the task, the more versions it is likely to have. This is explained more
      in Activity 1A.2 in Chapter 6.
                                                                        Instructional Design 15
4D
These three levels of design may be visualized within the overall instructional system
design, development, and evaluation process as shown in Figure 1.7. This “systems dia-
gram” is an attempt to visualize the overall instructional system design, development, and
evaluation process as it is described and explained in this book. The large box occupying
“center stage” in the diagram represents the ID functions with just-in-time analysis and
ongoing evaluation – perhaps a real-world ID department of an educational or training
organization, or perhaps just a theoretical visualization of the functions performed by
instructional designers and developers working on some project.
   Define. On the left of the diagram is a box representing the activities that precede
the ID process. These are explained in Chapter 2. They include analysis of the need for
instruction, carried out in a holistic and integrated manner that considers other forms of
intervention that may be necessary in addition to, or in place of, instruction. These activi-
ties, therefore, evaluate whether there is a need for instruction and clearly define that need
in the form of ID project goals and objectives.
   Design. In the left-hand part of this box, are the three levels of design. They are organ-
ized vertically, indicating that top-level design is followed by mid-level and lower-level
design, involving ever deeper just-in-time analysis at each of the levels. Also, at each of
these three levels, we see a cyclical, or iterative process of analysis, design, evaluation
and, if proved to be necessary, further analysis, design, and so on. Analyses of learners,
resources, and context are also conducted to inform the design decisions about both what
to teach and how to teach it.
   It is not always necessary to do all these kinds of analysis. The nature and scope of
each ID project determine which of the various kinds to conduct. For example, revising




Figure 1.7 Our Holistic 4D Model of ID.
16 Instructional Design
an existing course to cover a new piece of equipment would not require another top-level,
mid-level, or learner analysis, but only a lower-level (tactical) focus. The three levels of
design and guidelines on when and how to perform design at each of the levels will be
presented and explained in Chapters 5–8.
    Develop. In the right-hand part of the box, we see the instructional development pro-
cess, intimately linked to the design activities as shown by the arrows interlinking the
subsystem boxes. Development may be performed at several levels of detail, as required
by a given project. Development also involves careful evaluation at each stage. However,
in contrast to the design stages, where evaluation entails expert review by instructional
designers and subject-matter experts to improve the decisions taken at each design level,
evaluation during the development process involves trying out the instruction with real
learners to improve it. The stages and activities of the development process are discussed
in Chapter 9, and those for formative evaluation are discussed in Chapter 10.
    To complete our picture of the process, on both sides of the diagram are inputs and
outputs of the core instructional analysis-design-development-evaluation process: define
and deliver.
    Deploy. Finally, on the right of the diagram, there is a box representing the activities
that follow design and development. These entail implementing the instructional system
for regular, full-scale use in the school, training department, workplace, or informal learn-
ing environment (as appropriate), where the regular instructors and/or other ancillary staff
will deliver the instructional system by implementing, managing, and evaluating it. This
will include the process we call summative evaluation, as well as further formative evalua-
tion. These activities are discussed in Chapters 10 and 13.
    Thus, the ID process may be summarized as Define – Design – Develop – Deploy, with
three levels of holistic design and iterative cycles of analysis, design, and evaluation. Hence
it is called the Holistic 4D Model of ID.

Why Should You Use the Holistic 4D Model?
In our preface, we outlined ten innovations that appear in our Holistic 4D Model. Here we
elaborate some more on them.

 1. It uses a holistic design process. The cycles of design from top-level to mid-level
    to lower-level make the instruction less fragmented, more creative, and consequently
    more effective. They also make the ID process more efficient.
 2. It includes guidance about instructional theory. Unlike most ID models, it inte-
    grates guidance for selecting instructional methods into the ID process, resulting in
    instruction that is more effective, efficient, and motivational.
 3. It focuses on learner-centered instruction. The instructional methods incorporate
    up-to-date knowledge from learning sciences and instructional theory that include
    project-based, competency-based, self-directed, and anytime anywhere learning,
    thereby improving the effectiveness, efficiency, and appeal of the instruction.
 4. It focuses on holistic instructional sequences. Based on schema theory, it offers
    guidance for instructional sequences that are holistic and thereby place all learning
    within a meaningful context, thereby increasing the effectiveness (especially for reten-
    tion and transfer), efficiency, and appeal of the instruction.
 5. It addresses “topic” expertise as well as “task” expertise. Based on the distinc-
    tion between education and training, it offers guidance for designing instruction that
    is primarily focused on mental models (understandings) as well as instruction that
                                                                       Instructional Design 17
      is primarily focused on tasks (how to). This greatly improves the effectiveness, effi-
      ciency, and appeal of both kinds of instruction, but especially for understanding top-
      ics – an area largely overlooked in ID.
 6.   It addresses non-instructional interventions. In contexts for which training is
      important, many performance problems cannot be solved by instruction. The Holistic
      4D Model includes guidance about how to identify non-instructional interventions to
      improve performance, thereby producing more effective solutions and avoiding the
      expense of developing instruction that is not needed.
 7.   It uses just-in-time analysis. It provides guidance for conducting analysis activities
      immediately before the information is needed to create a part of the design, rather
      than trying to do all the analysis before any designing is done. This avoids doing
      unnecessary analysis, avoids overlooking information that later turns out to be impor-
      tant, and makes the information fresh in the designer’s mind just when it is needed,
      considerably increasing the efficiency of the ID process.
 8.   It uses rapid prototyping. It includes guidance for using either (or both) of two
      kinds of rapid prototyping: quantitative reduction whereby a small amount of the
      entire instructional system is developed rapidly, and qualitative reduction whereby it
      is developed more rapidly by making it a simpler facsimile of the final instructional
      system. Rapid prototyping increases the efficiency and, to a lesser extent, the effec-
      tiveness of the ID process.
 9.   It addresses the objectives controversy. Research on behavioral objectives yields
      mixed results, which has created protagonists and antagonists. The Holistic 4D Model
      distinguishes between what may be helpful for designers and what may be helpful for
      learners. It offers guidance to create designer objectives, which contain certain spe-
      cific kinds of information to guide the design process, and guidance to create learner
      objectives, which can be either abstract or concrete (what we call “demonstration
      objectives”). This results in more effective instruction.
10.   It utilizes more frequent evaluations. Guidance is offered for doing smaller, more
      frequent formative evaluations of both the instructional designs and the ID pro-
      cess, thereby increasing the efficiency of the ID process and the effectiveness of the
      instruction.

Where Are We?
In this chapter, we have discussed the origins and the evolution of ID and have briefly
described a selection of some of the ID models which have been proposed over the years.
We introduced a new model, which includes the strong points of many other models and
also places design in a broader, multi-level context of ID which may be summarized as
Define – Design – Develop – Deploy. Hence it is called the Holistic 4D Model of ID.
   The following chapters further describe this model and its use:

•     Unit 1, Define describes how to determine what instruction (if any) is required and
      how to plan an appropriate ID project (Chapter 2)
•     Unit 2, Design describes theories and other considerations that underlie the model
      (Chapters 3 and 4), followed by detailed guidance for designing the instruction
      (Chapters 5–8)
•     Unit 3, Develop describes some considerations for creating the instruction from the
      design, followed by detailed guidance for developing the instruction (Chapter 9) and
      formatively evaluating it (Chapter 10)
18 Instructional Design
•    Unit 4, Deploy describes some considerations for implementing the instructional sys-
     tem, followed by detailed guidance for implementing it (Chapter 11) and summatively
     evaluating it (Chapter 12)
•    The Epilogue provides some concluding remarks

Exercises
Here we offer suggestions for a teacher using this book as a textbook in a course, to help
the students understand more deeply the contents of this chapter. We suggest these exer-
cises be conducted in discussion groups of, say, three to five students each, so that those
students who are shy will have more opportunity to talk. Of course, these exercises can be
done individually by any reader who wants to deepen their understanding.

 1. Discuss the ways that ID projects might vary from each other. Then discuss the major
    ways that ID needs to differ for those variations. Finally, report your conclusions to
    the whole class.
 2. Discuss the major criticisms of ID models that you have or have heard.
 3. Discuss why ID models can be useful.
 4. Discuss the importance and merits of each of the ten innovations of the Holistic 4D
    Model.

References
ATD Research. (2015). Skills, challenges, and trends in instructional design. Retrieved from https://www
   .iacet.org/default/assets/File/pdfs/2015%20ATD_Research_Skills_Challenges_and_Trends_in_Instru
   ctional_Design.pdf.
Brand, S. (1994). How buildings learn: What happens after they’re built. New York, NY: Penguin Books.
Comenius, J.A. (1907). The great didactic: Setting forth the whole art of teaching all things to all men. London: Adam and
   Charles Black.
Dick, W., Carey, L., & Carey, J.O. (2014). The systematic design of instruction (8th ed.). Boston, MA: Pearson.
Dills, C.R., & Romiszowski, A.J. (Eds.). (1997). Instructional development paradigms. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
   Educational Technology Publications.
Educause Learning Institute. (2018). 7 Things you should know about learning engineering. Retrieved from
   https://library.educause.edu/-/media/files/library/2018/9/eli7160.pdf.
Gibbons, A.S., & Rogers, P.C. (2009). The architecture of instructional theory. In C. Reigeluth & A. Carr-
   Chellman (Eds.), Instructional-design theories and models (Vol. III, pp. 305–326). New York, NY: Routledge.
Gordon, J., & Zemke, R. (2000). The attack on ISD. Training, 37, 43–53.
Gustafson, K.L., & Branch, R.M. (2002). Survey of instructional development models (4th ed.). Syracuse, NY: ERIC
   Clearinghouse on Information & Technology.
International Board of Standards for Training, Performance and Instruction (Ibstpi). (2012). Instructional
   design competencies. Retrieved from http://ibstpi.org/.
Lieberman, M. (2018). Learning Engineers Inch toward the Spotlight. What is a learning engineer, and how
   is it different from other roles? Retrieved from https://www.insidehighered.com/digital-learning/article
   /2018/09/26/learning-engineers-pose-challenges-and-opportunities-improving.
Merrill, M.D. (2002). A pebble-in-the-pond model for instructional design. Performance Improvement, 41(7),
   39–44.
Molenda, M. (2003). In search of the elusive ADDIE model. Performance Improvement, 42(5), 34–36.
Morrison, G.R., Ross, S.M., Kalman, H., & Kemp, J.E. (2010). Designing effective instruction (6th ed.). Hoboken,
   NJ: Wiley.
Munzenmaier, C. (2014). Today’s instructional designer. Competencies and careers. Santa Rosa, CA: The eLearning
   Guild. Retrieved from https://momentum.gevc.ca/wp-content/uploads/2014/12/Todays-Instructional
   -Designer-2014.pdf.
                                                                                             Instructional Design 19
Piskurich, G.M. (2015). Rapid instructional design: Learning ID fast and right (3rd ed.). Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley
   & Sons, Inc.
Reiser, R.A. (2001). A history of instructional design and technology: Part II: A history of instructional design.
   Educational Technology Research and Development, 49(2), 57–67.
Reiser, R.A. (2018). A history of instructional design and technology. In R. A. Reiser & J. V. Dempsey (Eds.),
   Trends and issues in instructional design and technology (4th ed.). New York, NY: Pearson Education.
Reiser, R.A., & Dempsey, J.A. (Eds.). (2002). Trends and issues in instructional design and technology. Upper Saddle
   River, NJ: Merrill/Prentice Hall.
Romiszowski, A.J. (1981). Designing instructional systems: Decision making in course planning and curriculum design.
   London: Kogan Page. Reprinted 1990, 1996.
Romiszowski, A.J. (1986). Developing auto-instructional materials: From programmed texts to CAL and interactive video.
   London: Kogan Page. Reprinted1990, 1996.
Romiszowski, A.J., & Romiszowski, H.P. (2005). Retrospectiva e perspectivas do design instrucional e educação
   a distância: Análise da literatura [History of and perspectives for instructional design in distance education:
   A literature review]. Revista Brasileira de Aprendizagem Aberta e a Distancia, 4. Originally published in the online
   journal of the Brazilian Association for Distance Education (abed.org.br). (http://seer.abed.net.br/index
   .php/RBAAD). Retrieved from https://www.researchgate.net/publication/242090526_Retrospectiva_e
   _Perspectivas_do_Design_Instrucional_e_Educacao_a_Distancia_Analise_da_Literatura.
Saxberg, B. (2015). Why we need learning engineers. Chronicle of Higher Education. Retrieved from https://ww
   w.chronicle.com/article/Why-We-Need-Learning-Engineers/229391.
Saxberg, B., & Hess, F.M. (2013). Breakthrough leadership in the digital age: Using learning science to reboot schooling.
   Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin Press.
Simon, H. (1967). The job of a college president. Educational Record, 48. Retrieved from http://digitalcollec
   tions.library.cmu.edu/awweb/awarchive?type=file&item=33692.
Skinner, B.F. (1954). The science of learning and the art of teaching. Harvard Educational Review, 24(2), 86–97.
Skinner, B.F. (1968). The technology of teaching. In B.F. Skinner (Ed.), The technology of teaching (pp. 59–91).
   New York, NY: Appleton-Century-Crofts.
Tripp, S., & Bichelmeyer, B. (1990). Rapid prototyping: An alternative instructional design strategy. Educational
   Technology Research and Development, 38(1), 31–44.
Wagner, E. (2019). Learning Engineering: A primer. Elearning Guild. Retrieved from https://www.elearnin
   gguild.com/insights/238/learning-engineering-a-primer/.
Zemke, R., & Rossett, A. (2002). A hard look at ISD. Training, 39(2), 26–34.
Unit 1

Define




This unit contains one chapter. It describes how to determine what instruction (if any) is
required and how to plan an appropriate instructional design (ID) project by providing
guidance for performance analysis, instructional needs assessment, and project planning.
The analysis that occurs as a part of the Define process is different from that which occurs
as an integral part of the Design process (see Unit 2). This chapter also introduces plan-
ning for four functions that are essential to the Deployment of the instructional system
you design.




Our Holistic 4D Model of ID.
2      Define Your Project
       Pre-Instructional Design




Overview
Performance analysis, instructional needs assessment, and project planning are critical
activities that should be initiated before an instructional designer or instructional design
(ID) team enters into the ID process. This chapter provides information about each of
these critical activities and what goes into planning for your ID project. Further, this
chapter introduces four system functions, including management, support, delivery,
and evaluation, and provides guidance on how to plan for each of the four system
functions.

Performance Analysis
Performance analysis was developed to address organizational needs regarding inadequate
performance of employees. However, it can be adapted to address aspects of individual
human development, such as an individual’s performance as a citizen, a parent, or a reader.
First, we offer guidance for addressing organizational needs. Then we comment on adap-
tations to address individual needs.
   Performance analysis, sometimes called performance assessment (Piskurich, 2015) or
front-end analysis (Dick, Carey, & Carey, 2014), is often conducted to identify organiza-
tional performance problems and to decide what kinds of interventions can best address
them. Performance analysis may include:

•   A performance gap analysis
•   A performance opportunity analysis
•   Identification of instructional and non-instructional interventions

Performance Gap Analysis
A performance gap analysis aims to identify: the performance gap (that is, the difference
between the desired performance and the current performance); the causes of that gap;
and interventions needed to overcome the gap (see Figure 2.1).
   Performance Opportunity Analysis. Sometimes the performance gap is between
what is and what could be – it is founded on possibilities rather than problems. This form
of gap analysis, often referred to as Performance Opportunity Analysis, is conducted to
identify areas to improve what is already good performance (Piskurich, 2015). An analysis
24 Define Your Project




Figure 2.1 The Concept and Purpose of Performance Gap Analysis.


of what top performers do that distinguish them from average performers can provide
insights into ways to further improve employee performance.
   An example of this approach may be found in Tom Gilbert’s article “The Science of
Winning,” (Training Magazine, August 1988) in which he analyzes the performance of the
legendary Paul “Bear” Bryant of the University of Alabama who built a reputation as the
“best ever” football coach, with six national championships and 323 wins. Gilbert knew
Bryant well, through personal conversation, through his public pronouncements when
interviewed, and through observation of his performance as coach. What Bryant said
was typical of what most coaches say (“inspire them – give them great leadership – show
them how much you care”), but what he did was to observe and record the performance
of his players (on videotape) and use exemplary performance as examples to emulate and
typical performance (containing typical errors) as a basis for corrective feedback. Bryant
was an expert in performance gap/opportunity analysis. Marilyn Gilbert, who also knew
Bryant, updated her husband’s article in 2003. The subtitle of this version “says it all”:
Wherein We Observe Paul “Bear” Bryant Build A Winning Team – But Not the Way He Said He
Did. This version of the article (Gilbert & Gilbert, 2003) may be accessed online at: https
://eppicinc.files.wordpress.com/2007/11/the-science-of-winning-tom-and-marilyn-g
ilbert.pdf.
   Regardless of the kind of performance gap, the three major categories of causes of the
gap (Piskurich, 2015) are:

•   Organizational/environmental problems
•   Motivational/attitude problems
•   Knowledge/skill deficits.

ID is mostly concerned with knowledge/skills deficits, which can be addressed by instruc-
tion. Other (non-instructional) interventions are needed to address organizational/envi-
ronmental causes and motivational/attitude problems.
                                                                                Define Your Project 25

Table 2.1 Essential Questions for Performance Gap Analysis

Goal              Questions
To Identify the   •   What does excellent performance look like?
  Performance     •   How are the employees currently performing?
  Gap             •   What is the gap between the desired performance and the current performance?
                  •   What should the employees be doing differently, stop doing, or start doing?

To Identify the   Organizational/environmental problems
  Causes of the   • Are the employees clear on performance standards and expectations?
  Gap             • Do they have tools and resources needed for effective performance?
                  • Do they receive timely and constructive feedback on their performance?
                  • Do the organizational structure and systems support effective performance?
                  • Do they receive appropriate incentives for desired performance?
                  • Are there negative consequences for poor performance?
                  • Is workload distributed fairly?
                  • Are there any organizational or environmental problems that prevent them from
                    working effectively or efficiently?

                  Motivational/attitude problems
                  • Do they have adequate commitment for their job?
                  • Are they motivated to meet or exceed the performance expectations?

                  Knowledge/skills deficits
                  • Do they have the knowledge and skills needed for effective performance?
                  • Have they been properly trained on the task or job?
                  • Do they receive accurate and up-to-date information in a timely manner?
                  • Are their skills outdated?

To Select         • What non-instructional interventions are needed to address the performance gaps?
  Appropriate     • Are instructional interventions necessary?
  Solutions       • Can instructional interventions augment other performance interventions?




   So, how can you do a performance gap analysis? Table 2.1 offers some questions to
guide this kind of analysis.
   We highly recommend conducting an expert-review type of formative evaluation of the
results of the performance analysis. See Chapter 10 for guidance.

Identification of Instructional and Non-Instructional Interventions
Instructional interventions. When a performance problem or gap has been identified
as being caused by a knowledge and skills deficit, an instructional needs assessment is con-
ducted (see “Instructional Needs Assessment” below) to identify the major instructional
goals (instructional needs). However, in most cases, one or more non-instructional inter-
ventions are needed in combination with training or education. For example, conduct-
ing training without repairing faulty equipment will not solve the problem; it will only
exhaust resources. In addition, many non-instructional interventions require instruction as
part of their implementation. Therefore, instructional designers need to work with human
26 Define Your Project

Table 2.2 Motivation Killers and Motivators

What Causes and Destroys Motivation in Organizations?
Motivation Killers       1.   Act in a way that is perceived as dishonest, hypocritical, or unfair
                         2.   Provide vague, impossible, and constantly changing performance goals
                         3.   Impose arbitrary and unnecessary rules, policies, and work processes
                         4.   Support constant competition among everyone in the organization
                         5.   Point out people’s mistakes and criticize them for errors
Motivators That          1. Help people develop levels of self-confidence in their work skills
  Work for               2. Create a positive emotional environment at work
  Everyone               3. Ask people to accept and value their own performance goals
Team Motivation          1.   Foster mutual respect among teammates
  Strategies             2.   The team must believe weaker members are working hard to improve
                         3.   Require team members to collaborate with others
                         4.   Hold individual team members accountable
                         5.   Direct the team’s competitive spirit outside the team and the organization


performance technologists or others to develop an instructional program that augments
other performance interventions (Piskurich, 2015).
   Non-instructional interventions. When the performance gap is attributed to
organizational or environmental problems (e.g., poor equipment) or motivational/atti-
tude problems (e.g., lack of motivation), non-instructional interventions should be used.
Performance technology (PT) looks at the factors affecting workplace behavior. PT inter-
ventions address both individual and organizational factors that impact performance.
Non-instructional interventions may include job redesign, culture change, facilities and
tool design, job aids, incentive and feedback systems, organizational communications, and
organizational design, to name a few. Non-instructional interventions are often beneficial
in combination with instructional interventions (Chyung, 2008; Gilbert, 1978; Harless,
1975; Kaufman, 2000; Kaufman, Rojas, & Mayer, 1993; Mager & Pipe, 1997; Romiszowski,
1981; Rossett, 2009).
   Motivational programs or interventions can provide the initiative and lead us to use our
knowledge and skills to enhance our performance. Clark (2006) identified five major moti-
vation killers, three motivators that work for everyone, and five team motivation strategies
(see Table 2.2). They provide practical insights into how to increase work motivation at
the individual and team levels. Another effective way to increase work motivation is to
provide financial incentives. A variety of incentive and compensation programs, such as
monetary and non-monetary rewards, vacations, and career opportunities, can be effective
non-instructional interventions.
   Another common example of non-instructional interventions is electronic performance
support systems (EPSS), which are self-contained, online environments that support job
performance on an as-needed basis (Brown, 1996). While conventional training is usually
isolated from the performer’s workplace, an EPSS is integrated into the performer’s work-
place. EPSS is a good solution for enhancing performance when experts are not available.
Further, EPSS can be particularly useful for performers who prefer a self-directed style
of learning (Brown, 1996). Finally, ergonomics should be considered to create a safe and
productive work environment. Ergonomic interventions can be used to decrease physical
and mental stressors and increase comfort and safety (Kearney & Smith, 1999).
                                                                           Define Your Project 27

   EXAMPLE OF PERFORMANCE GAP ANALYSIS
   The picture below shows a “problem” with a quadricycle.




      This is a tough problem to solve just from the information available in the picture.
   But let’s do our best to define some more or less probable causes. If inspection were
   to reveal that the drive train of the quad bike broke due to metal fatigue of some key
   component or wear in the bearings, one may ask whether there is a procedure in place
   for regular checking and maintenance, repair, or replacement of these components.
   If not, we have a potential work-organization cause. If the appropriate routine pro-
   cedures are in place, were they followed completely and correctly? If not, why not?
       The answers to these questions may lead us in several directions: (1) training
   interventions if we verify that the mechanics lack essential knowledge or skills to
   perform the procedures; (2) motivational interventions if we verify that they “just
   don’t care”; (3) other forms of organizational or environmental interventions if we
   verify that despite knowing what should be done (and when) and despite possessing
   the necessary knowledge, skills, and motivation, some key tasks were this time over-
   looked or improperly executed. But we lack essential information.
      Bottom line: performance gap analysis should be done through observation of the
   performers performing – in this case, the team that prepares and maintains the quad
   bikes and not only the bike and rider during the race. The picture we analyzed only indi-
   cates that there is a problem to solve. Let’s do our gap analysis in the workshop where
   the mechanics work. Remember Tom Gilbert’s story about “Bear” Bryant.


   We highly recommend conducting an expert-review type of formative evaluation of
the results of the analysis of the instructional and non-instructional interventions. See
Chapter 10 for guidance.

Instructional Needs Assessment
Purpose
An instructional designer enters into the needs assessment process once a determination
has been made that instruction is a necessary intervention for a performance gap. An
instructional needs assessment is often referred to as a training needs assessment, learning needs
28 Define Your Project
assessment, needs analysis, or discrepancy analysis. The purpose of this kind of assessment is to
generate the instructional goals for an ID project (Dick, Carey, & Carey, 2014; Kaufman
et al., 1993; Witkin & Altschuld, 1995). A typical instructional needs analysis takes the
results of the performance gap analysis and attempts to provide information that will help
answer the following questions:

•     What knowledge, skills, and/or attitudes do the learners need to address the perfor-
      mance gap?
•     How important is each of the knowledge, skills, and attitudes you identified? Which
      training needs should be given priority if you can’t afford to address them all?
•     What are the “orienting” and “transfer” contexts like? Tessmer and Richey (1997)
      define the orienting context as preexisting conditions, such as learners’ prerequisite
      skills, attitudes toward instruction, and organizational culture regarding instruction;
      and they define transfer context as the real-world conditions in which the learner will
      use the knowledge, skills, and attitudes. In Chapter 4 we will also discuss the instruc-
      tional context – the context within which the instruction takes place.

A tremendous amount of money, time, and resources is often spent on unnecessary train-
ing that does not solve performance problems. An instructional needs assessment enables
instructional designers to adequately define the scope of the ID project based on data and
to avoid spending resources on unnecessary or unimportant areas by identifying and pri-
oritizing the training needs that address the performance gap.

Instructional Needs Assessment Process
This assessment is often conducted in five phases:

 1.   Gather preliminary data
 2.   Plan the instructional needs assessment
 3.   Collect the data
 4.   Identify and prioritize training needs
 5.   Prepare a needs assessment report

Table 2.3 describes these five phases.
   We highly recommend conducting an expert-review type of formative evaluation of the
results of the instructional needs assessment. See Chapter 10 for guidance.

ID Project Planning
What Is ID Project Planning?
In this section, we describe the nature of an ID project, project management, ID project
management, the project management process, and the ID project planning process.
   What is an ID project? According to the Project Management Institute (2009), a pro-
ject is:

      a temporary endeavor undertaken to create a unique product, service, or result. The
      temporary nature of projects indicates that a project has a definite beginning and end.
      The end is reached when the project’s objectives have been achieved or when the pro-
      ject is terminated because its objectives will not or cannot be met, or when the need
      for the project no longer exists. (p. 3)
                                                                                    Define Your Project 29

Table 2.3 Five Phases of an Instructional Needs Assessment

Phase                Activity
Phase 1:           Given the results of the performance gap analysis, obtain information about the
  Gather              perceptions of the client and key stakeholders associated with the problem or
  Preliminary Data    opportunity, regarding the performance gap. Also, obtain information about any
                      ethical concerns associated with the instructional needs assessment (if applicable),
                      management’s views about the purpose and goals for the assessment, and the
                      attitudes of learners and other stakeholders toward the assessment.
Phase 2:           Develop a work plan to ensure the assessment stays on target. The planning phase
  Plan the            involves determining (1) the purpose of the assessment, (2) the target audience,
  Instructional       (3) the types of data to be collected about the audience, (4) the methods for
  Needs               collecting data (sources and collection methods), and (5) the personnel, resources,
  Assessment          and tools needed to collect the data. The final step of the planning phase is (6)
                      to develop data collection instruments. Common data collection techniques
                      include interviews, observations, focus-group meetings, questionnaires, and
                      review of documents or artifacts (e.g., strategic plans, personnel requirements, job
                      descriptions).
Phase 3:           Collect assessment data. Careful consideration of the sample size and distribution
  Collect the Data    is needed when collecting data, since it is impossible to collect data from the
                      entire audience in most, if not all, situations. Data should be collected from a
                      representative sample of the audience.
Phase 4:           Analyze and interpret the collected data. The output of the analysis is a prioritization
  Identify and        of instructional needs. Needs can be prioritized using a variety of criteria –
  Prioritize          including the number of people impacted, the cost, the frequency, and timeliness
  Training Needs      – and developing a ranking scale. Define the instructional goals based on the data,
                      the ID resources available, and the instructional resources that can be afforded
                      when the instructional system is deployed. You may not have enough resources to
                      address the lowest priority training needs.
Phase 5:           Prepare an instructional needs assessment report to help managers, decision makers,
  Prepare a Needs     and stakeholders make the appropriate decisions about what to teach. The
  Assessment          following four sections should be included in a final report:
  Report            1. The purpose of the assessment
                    2. Description of the assessment process (how it was conducted and who was
                        involved)
                    3. Results – critical instructional needs and a prioritization of the identified needs
                    4. Instructional goals that identify who needs instruction and what instruction is
                        needed



An ID project involves the execution of five key activities – analysis, design, development,
implementation, and evaluation – but they are not strictly sequential. Analysis and design
should be done together (just-in-time analysis), formative evaluation should be done fre-
quently throughout the ID project, and implementation should be considered throughout
the ID project.
   The Holistic 4D Model (see Figure 1.7 and the remaining chapters in this book) is a
fairly complete description of how these five key activities may be sequenced and per-
formed during an ID project, showing how they are embedded in the overall project –
preceded by Project Definition (which includes performance gap analysis and instructional
needs assessment) and followed by Deployment (which includes implementation and
summative evaluation).
30 Define Your Project
   What is project management? Project management (PM) is both an art and a science.
The science consists of a set of processes using a systematic methodology for planning
and executing a project. The art consists of “soft skills,” including leadership, problem
solving, and managing resources and expectations. Successful PM is the art of bringing
together tasks, resources, and people needed to accomplish the project’s goals (Kerzner,
2009; Lewis, 2011; Randolph & Posner, 1988).
   What is ID project management? ID projects vary in size and complexity from
creating a job aid for a simple task to developing an interactive e-learning curriculum for
globally distributed employees. Some ID projects involve only one instructional designer,
while other projects may require a large team of many instructional designers, media
developers, subject-matter experts, and other professionals. Instructional designers play
different PM roles in different ID contexts (e.g., organizations, projects). In some small-
scale ID projects, for example, instructional designers may play multiple roles, including
the project manager role. On the other hand, large ID teams often include a project man-
ager or a project coordinator, which allows instructional designers to focus on designing
instruction.
   What is the PM process? Ensuring the effective flow of a project throughout its life-
cycle is the key to successful project management. The PM process is composed of five
phases (Project Management Institute, 2009).

 1. Initiating includes actions to begin a project.
 2. Planning includes defining the scope of the project, developing a strategic plan, and
    beginning to assemble priority lists and to plan team needs. This phase also addresses
    and clarifies the project goals and customer’s expectations, and it identifies the
    resources necessary to achieve those goals within timeline and budgetary constraints.
 3. Executing includes coordinating the right people and right resources to carry out the
    project plan and produce deliverables that meet the customer expectations.
 4. Monitoring and controlling measures progress toward achieving project goals, monitors
    deviation from the plan, and takes corrective action to match progress with plans and
    expectations.
 5. Closing includes formalizing acceptance of the project and bringing it to a well-docu-
    mented end.

The activities within each phase are a series of actions directed toward either defining or
producing a specific result. The information required in each PM activity can be custom-
ized to fit the particular project environment. Each PM phase’s outputs often become
inputs to another PM phase. These activities are iterative in nature, which requires con-
tinuous updating of the plan during the lifecycle of the project. Table 2.4 presents the
activities according to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK).

Guidance for ID Project Planning
Managing an ID project, whether large or small, can be a major undertaking. Instructional
designers or ID project managers can apply PM activities and tools to successfully manage
any ID project. In this chapter, we offer guidance on the first two phases of ID PM – initiat-
ing and planning. We also provide some guidance for formatively evaluating the ID process.
   Initiating phase. The initiating phase begins with a validated instructional needs
assessment report outlining the instructional needs. First, the instructional designer or pro-
ject manager needs to identify all stakeholders affected by the ID project, document rel-
evant information regarding their interests, and establish the project charter (or contract),
                                                                                   Define Your Project 31

Table 2.4 PM Process Activities from the PMBOK Guide (from Project Management Institute, 2009)

Phase           Definition                                        Activities/Products
1. Initiating   Authorize the project                              1. Develop project charter
                                                                   2. Identify stakeholders
2. Planning     Define and refine the objectives; select the       1.   Collect requirements
                  best alternative courses of action to attain     2.   Define scope
                  objectives                                       3.   Define activities
                                                                   4.   Prepare milestone chart
                                                                   5.   Sequence activities
                                                                   6.   Estimate activity duration
                                                                   7.   Estimate activity resources
                                                                   8.   Develop schedule
                                                                   9.   Estimate costs
                                                                  10.   Determine budget
3. Executing    Coordinate people and other resources to carry     1.   Direct/manage execution
                  out the plan                                     2.   Acquire project team
                                                                   3.   Manage project team
                                                                   4.   Manage stakeholders’ expectations
                                                                   5.   Conduct procurements
4. Monitoring & Ensure objectives are met; monitor and measure     1.   Monitor & control project work
   Controlling    progress regularly to identify variances so      2.   Control schedule
                  necessary corrective action can be taken         3.   Oversee budget/funding
                                                                   4.   Perform quality assurance
                                                                   5.   Communicate progress
                                                                   6.   Mitigate risks
                                                                   7.   Administer procurements
5. Closing      Formalize project or phase acceptance and bring    1.   Close project or phase
                  it to an orderly end                             2.   Close procurements


which formally authorizes the ID project. The project charter documents the instructional
need, defines the initial requirements and expectations, and gives the project manager the
authority to apply resources to the project work.
    Planning phase. The planning phase entails gathering information to produce an ID
PM plan. The purpose of this plan is to focus the project manager and team on system-
atically identifying, tracking, and documenting all of the project requirements. The plan
should generally address the project management elements shown in Table 2.5. Whatever
planning format is required for the project, it should start with the two outputs from the ini-
tiating phase – the project charter and the list of stakeholders/sponsors. Planning activities
should address both instructional and non-instructional interventions and should be com-
pleted before developing any new instruction or revising any existing instruction. Planning
should identify potential problems or difficulties that the project may encounter. A useful
tool for identifying such issues is the SWOT (Strengths – Weaknesses – Opportunities –
Threats) method of analysis. Another useful tool, based on systems-thinking, is the CIPP
(Context – Input – Process – Product) method for “troubleshooting” issues in complex
systems. This can be used both for evaluating problems in existing systems and for initial
diagnosis to predict potential sources of problems. These tools may be used in combina-
tion, one complementing the other. Finally, planning should also consider any of your
adaptations to the Holistic 4D Model, and you should expect to revise the plan at the end
32 Define Your Project

Table 2.5 Elements of an ID PM Plan

Element                         Description
Team Formation                  Decide who should be on the team and the roles and responsibilities of each.
Stakeholders                    State the details of the stakeholders.
Target Audience & Goals         Describe the intended learners and goals of the education or training.
Scope                           Define what the ID project contains, summarizing all the work required
                                  to successfully complete the instruction.
References                      Identify all necessary policies, guidance, and directives applicable to the
                                   instruction.
Constraints & Assumptions       Identify all known or potential problems or issues and assumptions that
                                   could arise during the ID process (e.g., resources, manpower, security,
                                   safety, environmental issues).
Project Management Strategies   Determine the way the team will work (decision-making process,
                                  frequency of meetings to discuss project progress, methods of
                                  communication and reporting, etc.).
Definition and Sequence of ID   Determine specific activities and interactivity dependencies that must be
  Activities                      performed to produce various project deliverables.
Timeline and Resources          Create an ID project timeline identifying activity sequences, durations,
                                   and resource requirements.
Estimated Costs                 Determine an approximation of (1) the costs for the ID process and (2)
                                  the costs of implementing instruction (resources, people, equipment,
                                  infrastructure).
Budget                          Establish a cost baseline for allocated funds and resources for the ID
                                   process and for implementing the instruction.
ID Process Evaluation           Develop an evaluation plan to improve process quality throughout the ID
                                  process (see below for more details).
Other Considerations            Produce written plans that detail how to execute, monitor, and control
                                   each of the activities of the ID process: analysis/design, development,
                                   implementation, and evaluation.
                                Plan for the ID project closing processes, during which all project activities will
                                   be evaluated and documented for lessons learned to finalize the project.
                                Consider the effects of the ID project on the organization.


of the top-level, the mid-level, and the lower-level ADE process. A template for an ID PM
plan is shown in Figure 2.2.
   ID process evaluation. Process evaluation is one of the key elements of the ID PM
Plan. A project manager or instructional designer should plan for process evaluation to
ensure that the ID process is of high quality. Process evaluation, for which we provide
guidance in Chapter 10, focuses on enabling instructional developers to improve their ID
process as it unfolds. A preliminary evaluation plan should be created during the planning
phase, and it should be updated throughout all phases of the ID process. A process evalu-
ation plan may contain such information as:

•   How the ID activities will be evaluated
•   Who will conduct the evaluations
•   When to conduct the evaluations
•   Evaluation schedule constraints
                                                                                    Define Your Project 33


                           PM Plan: [ID Project Title]

    1. Clients & Stakeholders

    2. Target Audience

    3. Project Goal & Scope

    4. Project Timeline & Process
       • Start Date:
       • End Date:
       No.      ID Activities    Deliverables Duration Start Date End Date Status


    5. Resources & Constraints

    6. Budget

    7. Project Team Members
                Name                      Roles              Responsibilities




    8. PM Strategies & Meeting Schedules
       • Decision-Making Process
       • Frequency of Meetings
       • Methods and Tools of Communication
       • Meeting Schedule

        Date        Time        Location/Tool       Objectives & Attendees


    9. ID Process Evaluation Plan


Figure 2.2 Template for an ID PM Plan.


•      Who will be interviewed for each activity being evaluated
•      Other data sources for each activity being evaluated
•      How the results should be documented
•      How problems should be resolved

Everyone conducting an activity in any phase should constantly seek to collect data about
what is working well, what is not working well, and how to improve it. The process evalu-
ation plan should be updated periodically to include new or revised information, such as:

•      Changes in the evaluation plan for the next phase
•      Rationale for changes made to the evaluation plan
•      Lessons learned about the evaluation process during the latest evaluations

It is usually beneficial to conduct an expert-review type of formative evaluation (with
expert project managers) of the project management plan. See Chapter 10 for guidance.
34 Define Your Project




Figure 2.3 Four System Functions.



Planning the Instructional-System Functions
Planning the instructional-system functions needs to occur as soon as you or your ID team
completes the ID PM plan. Figure 2.3 shows the four top-level functions of the instruc-
tional system – management, delivery, support, and evaluation – all of which take place
simultaneously.
   Delivery is the function whereby instruction is brought to the learner, such as instruc-
tor-led or online instruction.
   Support is the function of maintaining all parts of the system (e.g., instructor profes-
sional development, technology support). The importance of the support function in the
instructional system cannot be over-emphasized. A well-designed course may fall short of
the training goal without the right support components or systems being in place for the
education or training intervention(s).
   Management, sometimes called administration, is the function of directing or control-
ling instructional operations, such as assigning individuals to certain tasks associated with
an instructional program, acquiring, installing, and maintaining equipment and materials,
hiring and managing staff, coordinating day-to-day operations of an instructional system,
and maintaining records. Competent management is the key to an effective instructional
system. Management has the overall responsibility for ensuring that all components of the
system are fully integrated and compatible.
   Evaluation of all system functions is conducted periodically to ensure efficiency and
effectiveness of the operational instructional system. It is important to periodically evalu-
ate all the functions as long as the instructional system is operational. Both formative and
summative evaluation are important.
   The functions are permanent organizational functions that provide critical operational
support for any education and training programs. Managers (aka administrators) and
instructors may perform these system functions at any time, in any order, and as often as
                                                                                    Define Your Project 35
necessary during the lifetime of an instructional program. The outer three functions are
inextricably linked by operational evaluation that takes place continuously throughout all
the other functions of the total instructional system to achieve an improved instructional
program.
   Each of the four functions is brought into the planning process to adjust the ID PM
plan to ensure that all instructional system functions are taken into consideration. Some of
the products generated from this planning include:
•    Preliminary direction on the type of delivery system or methods
•    Operations constraints and day-to-day operations requirements
•    Instructional resource requirements
•    Plans for acquisition of equipment and facilities
•    Selection and preparation of instructors
•    Operational evaluation strategies
•    And so forth
Table 2.6 shows the activities for which you should plan for each of the four system functions.


Table 2.6 Planning Activities for the System Functions

Management
Description: Directs and controls all aspects of the instructional process.
Planning Activities – Plan how to:
 1. Direct and control all aspects of the instructional process.
 2. Organize, schedule, and monitor resources, such as personnel, equipment, facilities, and funds.
 3. Coordinate the instructional system operation and support.
 4. Maintain records, such as personnel and instructional equipment.
 5. Evaluate the effectiveness and efficiency of each element in the instructional system.
 6. Report the status and progress of the operation of the instructional system.
Support
Description: Provides for and maintains the system on a day-to-day and long-term basis.
Planning Activities – Plan how to:
 1. Supply equipment, parts, and materials.
 2. Provide student support, such as processing students “in” and “out” of their training or education
    programs (including resident and non-resident training/education venues).
 3. Provide staff support, such as leave processing and maintenance of personnel programs.
 4. Maintain equipment and facilities.
 5. Construct instructor aids, instructional aids, and facilities.
 6. Provide funding and services.
Delivery
Description: Provides means by which instruction is made available to students.
Planning Activities – Plan how to:
 1. Ensure that instructional delivery takes place as planned, including instructional staff for use and
    evaluation of the selected delivery method(s).
 2. Make instruction available to learners and give them access to whatever delivery method is utilized.
Evaluation
Description: Provides feedback and other information for the total instructional system.
Planning Activities – Plan how to:
 1. Gather feedback data through formative and summative operational evaluations.
 2. Analyze, report, and use the data.
36 Define Your Project
Where Are We?
In this chapter we have discussed the following:

•    Performance analysis, including performance gap analysis, performance opportunity
     analysis, and identification of instructional and non-instructional interventions
•    Instructional needs assessment to identify the instructional goals for the project
•    Project planning, including the nature of an ID project, project management, ID pro-
     ject management, the ID project management process, and ID project planning
•    Planning the four functions of an instructional-system – management, support, deliv-
     ery, and evaluation

When you have finished developing the PM plan for your ID project, you are almost
ready to start working on the project. But first, it is important to review some theory
and address some major considerations for designing instruction. These are the topics of
Chapters 3 and 4.

Exercises
Here again we offer suggestions for a teacher using this book as a textbook in a course,
to help the students understand more deeply the contents of this chapter. We suggest
that you organize students into an even number of teams of about three students each, to
choose an ID project to work on throughout the course. However, these exercises can be
done individually by any reader who wants to deepen their understanding and skills.

 1. Help each team to choose a project “client” for a very simple project.
 2. Have each team conduct a performance gap analysis, perform an instructional needs
    assessment, develop an ID project plan, and develop a systems function plan. This
    must be a very simple project (simple performance gap and instructional need) to be
    feasible to complete during the course.
 3. Have each team offer suggestions for improvement for one or two other teams before
    you review and provide feedback to the students.

References
Brown, L.A. (1996). Designing and developing electronic performance support systems. Newton, MA: Digital Press.
Chyung, S.Y. (2008). Foundations of instructional and performance technology. Amherst, MA: HRD Press, Inc.
Clark, R.E. (2006). Motivating individuals, teams, and organizations. In J. Pershing (Ed.), Handbook of human
   performance technology: Principles, practices, and potential (3rd ed., pp. 478–497). San Francisco, CA: Pfeiffer.
Dick, W., Carey, L., & Carey, J.O. (2014). The systematic design of instruction (8th ed.). Boston, MA: Pearson.
Gilbert, T.F. (1978). Human competence: Engineering worthy performance. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill.
Gilbert, T.F., & Gilbert, M. (2003). The science of winning: Wherein we observe Paul “Bear” Bryant build a
   winning team – But not the way he said he did. Retrieved from https://eppicinc.files.wordpress.com/200
   7/11/the-science-of-winning-tom-and-marilyn-gilbert.pdf.
Harless, J.H. (1975). An ounce of analysis (is worth a pound of objectives): A self-instructional lesson (3rd ed.). Falls
   Church, VA: Harless Performance Guild.
Kaufman, R.A. (2000). Mega planning: Practical tools for organizational success. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage
   Publications, Inc.
Kaufman, R.A., Rojas, A.M., & Mayer, H. (1993). Needs assessment: A user's guide. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
   Educational Technology Publications.
                                                                                                 Define Your Project 37
Kearney, L., & Smith, P. (1999). Workplace design for creativity. In H. Stolovich & E. Keeps (Eds.), Handbook
   of human performance technology (2nd ed., pp. 464–482). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass Pfeiffer.
Kerzner, H. (2009). Project management: A systems approach to planning, scheduling, and controlling (10th ed.). Hoboken,
   NJ: John Wiley & Sons.
Lewis, J.P. (2011). Project planning, scheduling & control: The ultimate hands-on guide to bringing projects in on time and on
   budget (5th ed.). New York, NY: McGraw-Hill.
Mager, R.F., & Pipe, P. (1997). Analyzing performance problems, or, you really oughta wanna: How to figure out why people
   aren't doing what they should be, and what to do about it (3rd ed.). Atlanta, GA: Center for Effective Performance.
Piskurich, G.M. (2015). Rapid instructional design: Learning ID fast and right (3rd ed.). Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley
   & Sons, Inc.
Project Management Institute. (2009). A guide to the project management body of knowledge (PMBOK Guide – 5th
   ed.). Retrieved from http://dinus.ac.id/repository/docs/ajar/PMBOKGuide_5th_Ed.pdf.
Randolph, W.A., & Posner, B.Z. (1988). Effective project planning and management: Getting the job done. Englewood
   Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Romszowski, A.J. (1981). Designing instructional systems: Decision making in course planning and curriculum design.
   London: Kogan Page. (Reprinted 1990, 1996).
Rossett, A. (2009). First things fast: A handbook for performance analysis. San Francisco, CA: Pfeiffer.
Witkin, B.R., & Altschuld, J.W. (1995). Planning and conducting needs assessments: A practical guide. Thousand Oaks,
   CA: Sage Publications.
Unit 2

Design




This unit begins with the most important consideration for designing instruction – theories
of learning and instruction (see Chapter 3). They provide guidance for selecting instruc-
tional methods that determine the effectiveness, efficiency, and appeal of your instruction.
Then Chapter 4 describes nine other major considerations to improve the quality of your
instruction and the efficiency of your ID process.
   These two chapters are followed by detailed guidance for designing instruction, inte-
grated with just-in-time analysis activities and immediate formative evaluation activities
(analysis-design-evaluation – ADE cycles). Chapter 5 addresses top-level ADE to cre-
ate a fuzzy vision of the instruction, including a top-level view of the content, sequence,




Our Holistic 4D Model of ID.
40 Design
and instructional methods. Then Chapter 6 addresses mid-level ADE to provide the next
level of clarity about the vision, including the mid-level content, sequence, objectives,
assessments, instructional methods, and media for both task expertise and topic expertise.
Chapters 7 and 8 address lower-level ADE to provide the final level of clarity about the
vision, including content, sequence, and instructional methods, based on resources and
existing instruction, for both task expertise and topic expertise. Chapters 5–7 indicate
when to do formative evaluation and revision during those analysis and design activities.
3      Considerations for Design
       Theories of Learning and Instruction




Overview
Instructional design (ID) should be grounded in theories of learning and instruction. In
order to provide an overview of basic theories of learning and instruction, this chapter first
describes five major categories of learning that are helpful for selecting instructional methods:
(1) memorizing, (2) understanding, (3) applying skills, (4) applying higher-order thinking
skills, and (5) acting on attitudes and values. Then, it summarizes three types of learning
theories: (1) behavioral, (2) cognitive, and (3) constructivist. Further, this chapter explains
what instructional theory is, how it is different from learning theory, and why it is important.
A summary of some of the well-known instructional theories is also provided.

Categories of Learning
There are many purposes and ways of categorizing learning. For designing instruction,
the focus is on categories that require differences in instructional methods. In real-life
performances, these types of learning are integrated, but they are learned differently. For
those who are familiar with the taxonomies of Bloom (Anderson et al., 2000; Bloom,
Engelhart, Furst, Hill, & Krathwohl, 1956), Gagné (1985), Ausubel (1968), J.R. Anderson
(1983, 1996), and/or Merrill (1983), Reigeluth (Reigeluth & Moore, 1999) has synthesized
from those taxonomies the most useful categories for designing instruction. The synthe-
sis identifies four major categories that are particularly helpful for selecting instructional
methods for the cognitive and motor domains of learning: (1) memorize, (2) understand,
(3) apply skills, and (4) apply higher-order thinking skills (see Table 3.1).
   Unlike with Gagné’s and Anderson’s taxonomies, it is helpful to distinguish between
memorization and understanding, because each requires very different methods of instruc-
tion. Conversely, it is not very helpful to distinguish among analysis, synthesis, and evalua-
tion because those higher-order skills require very similar methods of instruction. Another
important kind of learning is attitudes and values from the affective domain. Despite the
importance of the affective domain, less research has been done to identify methods of
instruction for the types of learning in the affective domain. The five kinds of learning are
briefly summarized next, but more in-depth descriptions and examples are provided in
Chapter 8.
   Memorize information. Memorization entails acquiring the ability to recognize or
recall information. Some of the most common kinds of memorization include associa-
tions (a simple stimulus and response, such as a picture of an aircraft and its name) and
verbal chains (such as a poem or a Miranda rights statement to be read to someone being
42 Theories of Learning and Instruction

Table 3.1 Taxonomies Identifying Four Major Kinds of Learning

        Bloom             Gagné            Ausubel      Anderson         Merrill           Synthesis
     Knowledge                               Rote                      Remember           Memorize
                          Verbal           learning    Declarative      verbatim         information
    Comprehension      information        Meaningful   knowledge      Remember           Understand
                                           learning                   paraphrased       relationships
     Application     Intellectual skill                Procedural    Use a generality       Apply
                                                       knowledge                            skills
       Analysis         Cognitive                                        Find a         Apply higher-
      Evaluation         strategy                                       generality      order thinking
      Synthesis                                                                             skills


placed under arrest), but one can also memorize visuals, sounds, spatial relationships, and
muscle movements.
    Understand relationships. Understanding entails learning the relationships among
concepts. Concepts are objects, events, or ideas. In most cases, instances can be classi-
fied as either belonging or not belonging to the category represented by the concept. This
is a skill, rather than an understanding. For example, “fraction” is a concept. Classifying
numbers as being or not being a fraction is a skill. Some concepts are difficult to classify,
like “atom.” While the ability to classify is desired for many concepts, sometimes it is
important for the learner to understand rather than be able to classify a concept, as in the
case of “atom.” There are two major kinds of understanding: conceptual and theoretical
understanding (Reigeluth, 1980). These are the major elements of a schema.
•     Conceptual understanding. Conceptual understanding entails learning descriptive relation-
      ships among concepts. There are different dimensions of conceptual understanding
      that are based on different kinds of conceptual relationships, including superordinate,
      coordinate, subordinate, analogical, experiential, and others. There are many different
      dimensions of understanding for any given concept.
•     Theoretical understanding. Theoretical understanding entails learning change relation-
      ships among concepts, including cause-effect relationships and natural-process rela-
      tionships. Causal relationships, often called causal models, can have multiple causes
      for an effect and multiple effects for a cause. They can also exist in chains of causes
      and effects, and each relationship is more often probabilistic (the cause will not always
      have a given effect) than deterministic (the cause always has a given effect). Learning
      complex causal models is essential for developing many kinds of expertise. Natural-
      process relationships are the ordered events that comprise a natural process. A natural
      process is different from a procedure in that it is not a set of steps intended to achieve
      a goal; rather it is a set of events that occur naturally in the world, like the life cycle of
      a flowering plant or the phases of the moon.
   Apply skills. Application entails acquiring the ability to perform a skill (physical and/
or cognitive). Three kinds of cognitive skills include concept-classification (such as identify-
ing numbers that are fractions and those that are decimals), procedure-using (such as adding
fractions), and principle-using (such as predicting the effects of a one-fifth reduction in the
production of oranges in the United States). Each of these three kinds of skills arrays
on a continuum from purely routine skills, whose performance does not vary from one
                                                            Theories of Learning and Instruction 43
situation to another, to transfer skills, whose performance varies greatly from one situation
to another and therefore requires the ability to generalize. Transfer skills are often called
complex cognitive skills.
    Apply higher-order skills. Higher-order learning includes the top three levels of
Bloom’s taxonomy (analysis, synthesis, and evaluation) and their various configurations
in metacognitive skills (sometimes called metaskills), including critical thinking, learning
strategies, and self-direction. This kind of skill is distinguished from domain-specific skills
(subject-area skills) because it takes much longer to learn and needs to be applied across a
broader range of domains. Metacognitive skills are configured into the complex skills of
adapting, monitoring, and correcting the use of individual skills in complex performances
that integrate cognitive, perceptual, and motor processes. Difficulty in learning a higher-
order thinking skill depends on the number of component higher-order skills involved.
    Act on attitudes and values. A value is the importance a person attaches to some-
thing, such as honesty and consideration for others, and is difficult to change. An attitude
is the way a person’s values are manifested. Put another way, a value is associated with a
collection of attitudes. Typically, values are changed by changing related attitudes gradu-
ally over time. Attitude change entails a person moving from one point on a continuum to
another. For example, attitudes about sexual harassment fall on a continuum from being
strongly against it to being strongly disposed to it. An attitude has three components:
affective, cognitive, and psychomotor (Kamradt & Kamradt, 1999). To change an existing
attitude, all three components should be moved by manageable stages in the desired direc-
tion. If any one component lags much behind the other two components, attitude change
is unlikely to occur. Each component requires different instructional methods. It is easier
to create new attitudes than to change existing attitudes. What Romiszowski (1981) refers
to as interactive skills and reactive skills also fall largely into this category with some cogni-
tive and physical components.
    Of course, there are other kinds of learning in the affective domain. Krathwohl, Bloom
and Masia (1964) categorized this domain into five stages of affective learning: receiving,
responding, valuing, organizing, and characterizing. Common categories in this domain
include attitudes, values, morals, ethics, emotions, intrapersonal skills, interpersonal skills,
and more. Social and emotional learning (SEL) has received increasing attention since
about 2000. These kinds of affective learning are very complex, and research is far from
conclusive on how best to foster them. Therefore, in this book we only address attitudes
and values.
    In real life, the types of learning are integrated. This integration can be accomplished
through project-based (or task-based) learning whereby authentic tasks are performed,
requiring use of all the various types of learning they encompass. Guidance for designing
each of these kinds of learning is offered in Chapter 8.

Learning Theories
Learning theory is the body of principles proposed by psychologists and educators to
explain how people acquire skills, knowledge, and attitudes. Learning theories are descrip-
tive. They describe how learning occurs. Types of learning theories (often called theo-
retical approaches) include (1) behavioral theories, such as classical conditioning theory
and reinforcement theory; (2) cognitive theories, such as information processing theory,
schema theory, and social interaction theory; and (3) constructivist theories, such as cog-
nitive constructivism, social constructivism, and constructionism. While these three types
are useful, it is important to understand that the boundaries among them can be fuzzy, and
44 Theories of Learning and Instruction
that some learning theories – and most instructional theories – have elements from two
or even all three types.

Behavioral Theory
Behavioral theories focus on observable events and therefore do not attempt to explain
what goes on in the mind. The two major kinds of behavioral theories are classical condi-
tioning theory and reinforcement theory, but there are other kinds of behavioral theories
as well.
   Classical conditioning theory. This theory was proposed by a Russian physiologist,
Ivan Pavlov. Classical conditioning (also known as respondent conditioning) occurs when
a stimulus (e.g., food) already elicits a response (e.g., salivation) from a person, and a new
stimulus (e.g., a bell) is paired with the existing stimulus (e.g., food) until it alone elicits the
same response (Pavlov, 1897/1902; Watson, 1924). A person salivates when presented
with delicious food. If a bell is rung each time the food is presented, eventually the bell
alone will cause the person to salivate.
   Reinforcement theory. Reinforcement (or operant conditioning or instrumental con-
ditioning) takes place when the learner makes an association between a stimulus or cue
and the desired behavior. When the behavior is followed by a reward or removal of a
punishment, it is reinforced. Learning occurs as learners become able to distinguish among
stimuli and respond to them in accordance with the way they were previously reinforced
(Skinner, 1953, 1965; Thorndike, 1911, 1921).
   Behavioral theories are primarily relevant for lower levels of learning, such as emotional
responses (e.g., extinguishing a fear response to spiders) and memorizing information.

Cognitive Theory
Cognitive theories focus on what is going on in the learner's mind. Three major kinds of
cognitive theory are the information processing theory, schema theory, and social cognitive
theory, but there are also many other cognitive learning theories, such as attribution theory
(Weiner, 1972), cognitive load theory (Sweller, 1994), gestalt theory (Wertheimer, 1923),
metacognitive theory (Flavell, 1985), situated cognition (Brown, Collins, & Duguid, 1989),
and stage theory of cognitive development (Piaget, 1952), among others.
    Information processing theory. Information processing theory says that the learner's
brain has internal structures that select and process incoming material, store and retrieve
it, use it to produce behavior, and receive and process feedback on the results. A number
of cognitive processes are involved in learning, including the “executive” functions of
selective perception, short-term storage, semantic encoding, long-term storage, retrieval,
response organization, and performance (Atkinson & Shiffrin, 1968; Craik & Lockhart,
1972; Gagné, 1985).
    Schema theory. Knowledge is thought to be stored as schemata and as part of propo-
sitional networks. A schema is a structured set of memory elements (concepts, proposi-
tions, images, and attitudes) representing a large set of meaningful information pertaining
to an event or object (Anderson & Spiro, 1977; Bartlett, 1932; Piaget, 1952; Rumelhart,
1980). For an event, such as a preflight check or preventive maintenance procedure like
checking the oil in your car, a schema may take the form of a script (a kind of story or
scenario that organizes information). For an object, such as an automobile, house, or
chair, a schema may take the form of a frame (a structure that looks like a table or matrix
into which different kinds of information fit). Regardless of type, a schema contains
                                                          Theories of Learning and Instruction 45
information on features of the object or event. These features, called slots, are filled
in by the learner when encountering new information that relates to the schema in a
process called assimilation. When inconsistencies are found between a schema and new
information, the schema is modified in a process called accommodation. Sometimes the
inconsistencies are so great that a massive change in the schema is required. That massive
change is called restructuring.
   Social cognitive theory. This theory, sometimes called social learning theory, says that
learning and consequent changes in behavior take place as a result of interaction between
the learner and the environment, primarily through observing and imitating the actions
of others (Bandura, 1977, 1986). Behaviors are modeled either by other people or sym-
bolically. The environment demonstrates the consequences of the modeled behaviors (ele-
ments of behaviorist theory), and the learner cognitively processes the observed behaviors
and consequences and changes his or her own behavior appropriately. The cognitive
processes include attention, retention, motor responses, and motivation. Techniques for
achieving learning (which are instructional theory rather than learning theory) include
direct modeling and verbal instruction. Behavior, personal factors, and environmental
events all operate together to produce learning.

Constructivist Theory
Constructivist theory proposes that people learn by actively constructing their knowledge
and skills, primarily through experience, reflection on their experience, observation of expe-
rience, and discussion of experience. Three major kinds of constructivist theory include
cognitive constructivism, social constructivism, and constructionism, but there are other
constructivist theories, or varieties of these theories, as well, such as anchored instruction
(Bransford, Sherwood, Hasselbring, Kinzer & Williams, 1990), cognitive apprenticeship
(Collins, Brown, & Newman, 1988), cognitive dissonance (Festinger, 1962), communities
of practice (Wenger, 1998), and social development theory (Vygotsky, 1978, 1986), among
others.
   Cognitive constructivism. This kind of constructivism proposes that people learn
primarily by doing and that skills learned are “situated” in the context in which they are
learned, meaning that transfer of those skills to unfamiliar contexts is difficult (Dewey,
1933; Lave & Wenger, 1990; Perry, 1999; Piaget, 1952). Furthermore, in order to not
become “inert knowledge,” they should be learned and practiced within a broader context.
   Social constructivism. This theory proposes that individual learning occurs through
the construction of shared meaning in a group (Palincsar, 1998; Vygotsky, 1978, 1986). It
addresses a group’s development of a “small culture” with shared artifacts. Collaborative
learning and small-group discussion are instructional methods that are aligned with social
constructivism. So are communities of practice (Wenger, 1998).
   Constructionism. Building upon Jean Piaget’s constructivist theory, constructionist
theory agrees that knowledge is actively constructed by learners rather than transmit-
ted by a teacher (Papert, 1993a, 1993b). However, constructionism takes the notion of
individual knowledge construction one step further by adding the idea of “learning-by-
making.” It proposes that learners learn best when they are actively engaged in the con-
struction of concrete and meaningful artifacts that can be shared with others (Harel &
Papert, 1991). Constructionist theory emphasizes that the construction of concrete arti-
facts “in the world” can support the construction of knowledge “in the head,” whereas
Piaget’s constructivist theory focuses on the construction of knowledge in the learner’s
head.
46 Theories of Learning and Instruction
Instructional Theories
What is an instructional theory? How is it different from learning theory? An instructional
theory or instructional-design theory is “a theory that offers explicit guidance on how
to better help people learn and develop” (Reigeluth, 1999, p. 5). While learning theory
is about natural processes by which learning occurs, instructional theory is about what
should be done to help those natural processes take place (Reigeluth, 1999). Instructional
theory is prescriptive, whereas learning theory is descriptive. Instructional theory identifies
methods of instruction (ways to facilitate learning) and their situations (when and when
not to use those methods).
    Learning theory explains why an instructional method works in a given situation, and
it can be used to derive new methods of instruction, but it is of very little help to instruc-
tional designers. Instructional theories are more directly and easily applied to ID problems
since they describe specific methods and situations for their use, rather than describing
what goes on inside a learner’s head when learning occurs.
    To be useful to instructional designers, instructional theory must offer guidance about
which instructional methods to use when. These are called instructional methods and
instructional situations, respectively (Reigeluth & Carr-Chellman, 2009a). Here are some
characteristics of each:
•   Instructional situations
    o Values about various aspects of the instruction (based on philosophy, not data)
        ⬛     About learning goals – opinions about what should be taught
        ⬛     About priorities – opinions about the relative importance of effectiveness,
              efficiency, and appeal for the instruction
        ⬛     About methods – opinions about which methods are best
        ⬛     About power – opinions about who should be given the power to decide
              about learning goals, priorities, and methods
    o Conditions
        ⬛     Content – the nature of what is to be learned
        ⬛     Learner – the nature of the learner
        ⬛     Learning environment – the nature of the learning environment
        ⬛     ID constraints – the nature of constraints on the ID process
•   Instructional methods
    o Scope of a method – the amount of instruction with which a method deals
        ⬛     Continuum from macro through meso to micro
    o Generality of a method – the breadth of instructional situations in which a method
        should be used
        ⬛     Continuum from universal to local
    o Precision of a method – the level of detail of the description of a method
        ⬛     Continuum from highly precise to very vague
    o Power of a method – the amount a method contributes toward the attainment of
        its learning goal
        ⬛     Continuum of probability from 0.0 (no power) to 1.0 (absolute power)
    o Consistency of a method – the reliability with which a method contributes its
        power toward the attainment of its learning goal
        ⬛     Continuum from high to low consistency

All instructional theories describe not only the methods, but also the situations in which
they should (and should not) be used. Without the situations, all you have is an instructional
                                                             Theories of Learning and Instruction 47
model, and any instructional model is inappropriate for many situations. Instructional
designers look to instructional theories to identify the best methods for helping people
learn in different situations. Of all the situational factors, the kind of learning (the nature
of the content) is the most important consideration for selecting the best instructional
methods – much more important than the kind of learner. Learner differences have much
more impact on what to learn than how to learn it. The following is a brief summary of
four instructional theories. The precision of these descriptions is not sufficient to reveal
the situational factors in three of them.


Gagné’s Nine Events of Instruction and Hierarchical Sequencing
Gagné (1985) created a nine-step process called the events of instruction, which provides
a systematic approach to instruction. Gagné’s “nine events of instruction” consist of the
following:

 1.   Gain attention
 2.   Inform learners of objectives
 3.   Stimulate recall of prior learning
 4.   Present the content
 5.   Provide guidance
 6.   Elicit performance
 7.   Provide feedback
 8.   Assess performance
 9.   Enhance retention and transfer

Gagné (1985) also proposed a hierarchical sequence for teaching skills. It consists of break-
ing a complex skill into simpler part-skills, which in turn are broken into their simpler part-
skills, and so forth until the skills hierarchy reaches the learners’ entry level of knowledge.
The sequence is then designed by always teaching simpler part-skills before teaching the
larger skills of which they are a part.

Elaboration Theory
The elaboration theory, developed by Reigeluth (1999) and Merrill, aims to help select and
sequence content in a way that optimizes attainment of learning goals. This theory offers
three major methods: conceptual elaboration sequence, theoretical elaboration sequence,
and simplifying conditions sequence.

 1. Conceptual elaboration sequence: teach broader, more inclusive concepts before the nar-
    rower, more detailed concepts that elaborate upon them. Use this approach when the
    goals call for learning many related concepts.
 2. Theoretical elaboration sequence: teach broader, more inclusive principles before the nar-
    rower, more detailed ones that elaborate upon them. Use this approach when the
    goals call for learning many related principles and/or heuristics.
 3. Simplifying conditions sequence: teach a simpler version of a task (that is still fairly repre-
    sentative of all versions) before teaching progressively more complex versions. Use
    this approach when the goals call for learning a task of at least moderate complexity.
48 Theories of Learning and Instruction
First Principles of Instruction
Merrill (2002) identified five prescriptive principles that are common to various instruc-
tional theories (see Figure 3.1). The five “first principles” include:

 1. Problem: learning is promoted when learners are engaged in solving real-world
    problems
 2. Activation: learning is promoted when existing knowledge is activated as a foundation
    for new knowledge
 3. Demonstration: learning is promoted when new knowledge is demonstrated to the
    learner
 4. Application: learning is promoted when new knowledge is applied by the learner
 5. Integration: learning is promoted when new knowledge is integrated into the learner’s
    world

4C/ID Model
The four-component ID (4C/ID) model claims that environments for complex learning can
always be described in terms of four interrelated blueprint components: learning tasks, sup-
portive information, procedural information, and part-task practice (van Merriënboer, 1997);
van Merriënboer, Clark, & de Croock, 2002; van Merriënboer & Kirschner, 2007, 2013).

 1. Learning tasks: concrete, authentic, whole-task experiences (organized in simple-to-
    complex task classes)
 2. Supportive information: supports the learning and performance of non-recurrent aspects
    of learning tasks
 3. Procedural information: prerequisite to the learning and performance of recurrent aspects
    of learning tasks or practice items
 4. Part-task practice: provides additional practice for selected recurrent constituent skills
    in order to reach the required level of automaticity

To provide an easy-to-use version of the 4C-ID model, van Merriënboer and Kirschner
(2007) developed ten steps to complex learning (see Table 3.2). The ten steps are ID pro-
cess (not instructional theory) intended for the development of educational or training
programs aimed at the acquisition of complex cognitive skills.

Where Are We?
We have described three major considerations that underlie the second D in the Holistic
4D Model – Design. First, the categories of learning – memorize information, understand



 INTEGRATION                        ACTIVATION

                    PROBLEM

 APPLICATION                     DEMONSTRATION


Figure 3.1 First Principles of Instruction.
                                                                      Theories of Learning and Instruction 49

                 Table 3.2 Ten Steps to Complex Learning

                 Blueprint Components of 4C-ID      Ten Steps to Complex Learning
                 Learning tasks                     1.    Design learning tasks
                                                    2.    Sequence task classes
                                                    3.    Set performance objectives
                 Supportive information             4.    Design supportive information
                                                    5.    Analyze cognitive strategies
                                                    6.    Analyze mental models
                 Procedural information             7.    Design procedural information
                                                    8.    Analyze cognitive rules
                                                    9.    Analyze prerequisite knowledge
                 Part-task practice                 10.   Design part-task practice
                 Source: van Merriënboer, J.J.G, & Kirschner, P.A. (2007). Ten Steps to Complex
                 Learning. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.



relationships, apply skills, apply higher-order thinking skills, and act on attitudes and val-
ues – are the foundation for designing effective instruction, because each requires different
instructional strategies. Furthermore, learning theories provide guidance and rationale for
selection of instructional methods for each category of learning. Second, we briefly sum-
marized three types of learning theories – behavioral, cognitive, and constructivist theories
– for they all are relevant to the design of good instruction. Third, we described instructional
theories, which differ from learning theories in that they provide direct guidance as to which
instructional methods to use when, for each of those different kinds of learning. We briefly
summarized the nature of instructional theory, followed by four instructional theories:
Gagné’s nine events of instruction, elaboration theory, Merrill’s first principles, and van
Merriënboer’s 4C/ID model, but these are only a few of the many instructional theories
that provide valuable guidance for ID. Descriptions of some others are provided in the
four volumes of Instructional-Design Theories and Models edited by Reigeluth and colleagues
(Reigeluth, 1983, 1999; Reigeluth, Beatty, & Myers, 2017; Reigeluth & Carr-Chellman,
2009b).
   The next chapter (Chapter 4) describes eight other considerations for Design.
Then, Chapters 5–8 provide detailed guidance for Design using the considerations in
Chapters 3 and 4. The remaining chapters address Develop and Deploy.

Exercises
Here again we offer suggestions for a teacher using this book as a textbook in a course, to
help the students understand more deeply the contents of this chapter. We suggest that
you keep the same teams of about three students each to continue to work on their ID
projects throughout the course. However, these exercises can be done individually by any
reader who wants to deepen their understanding and skills.

 1. Have each team categorize several of the types of learning that will possibly be impor-
    tant for its project.
 2. Have each team offer suggestions for improvement for the categorizations of one or
    two other teams before you review and provide feedback to the students.
50 Theories of Learning and Instruction
 3. Have a whole-class, synchronous discussion of the differences between learning the-
    ories and instructional theories and the ways in which each is useful.

References
Anderson, J.R. (1983). The architecture of cognition. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Anderson, J.R. (1996). The architecture of cognition. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Anderson, L.W., Krathwohl, D.R., Airasian, P. W., Cruikshank, K.A., Mayer, R.E., Pintrich, P.R., … Wittrock,
    M.C. (2000). A taxonomy for learning, teaching, and assessing: A revision of Bloom’s taxonomy of educational objectives.
    New York, NY: Pearson, Allyn & Bacon.
Anderson, R.C., & Spiro, R.J. (1977). Schooling and the acquisition of knowledge. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Atkinson, R.C., & Shiffrin, R.M. (1968). Human memory: A proposed system and its control processes.
    Psychology of Learning and Motivation, 2, 89–195.
Ausubel, D.P. (1968). Educational psychology: A cognitive view. New York, NY: Holt, Rinehart & Winston.
Bandura, A. (1977). Social learning theory. New York, NY: General Learning Press.
Bandura, A. (1986). Social foundations of thought and action: A social cognitive theory. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
    Prentice-Hall.
Bartlett, F.C. (1932). Remembering: A study in experimental and social psychology. Cambridge, England: Cambridge
    University Press.
Bloom, B.S., Engelhart, M.D., Furst, E.J., Hill, W.H., & Krathwohl, D.R. (Eds.). (1956). Taxonomy of educational
    objectives, the classification of educational goals. Handbook I: Cognitive domain. Harlow, Essex, England: Longman.
Bransford, J.D., Sherwood, R.D., Hasselbring, T.S., Kinzer, C.K., & Williams, S.M. (1990). Anchored
    instruction: Why we need it and how technology can help. In D. Nix & R. Sprio (Eds.), Cognition, education,
    and multimedia: Exploring ideas in high technology. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum Associates.
Brown, J.S., Collins, A., & Duguid, P. (1989). Situated cognition and the culture of learning. Educational
    Researcher, 18(1), 32–42.
Collins, A., Brown, J.S., & Newman, S.E. (1988). Cognitive apprenticeship. Thinking: The Journal of Philosophy
    for Children, 8(1), 2–10.
Craik, F.I., & Lockhart, R.S. (1972). Levels of processing: A framework for memory research. Journal of Verbal
    Learning and Verbal Behavior, 11(6), 671–684.
Dewey, J. (1933). How we think. Lexington, MA: Heath.
Festinger, L. (1962). A theory of cognitive dissonance (Vol. 2). Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Flavell, John H. (1985). Cognitive development. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Gagné, R.M. (1985). The conditions of learning and theory of instruction. New York, NY: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
Harel, I., & Papert, S. (1991). Software design as learning environment. In I. Harel & S. Papert (Eds.), Children
    designers: Interdisciplinary constructions for learning and knowing mathematics in a computer-rich school (pp. 41–85).
    Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Kamradt, T.F., & Kamradt, E.J. (1999). Structured design for attitudinal instruction. In C.M. Reigeluth (Ed.),
    Instructional-design theories and models: A new paradigm of instructional theory (Vol. II, pp. 563–590). Mahwah, NJ:
    Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1990). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
    University Press.
Merrill, M.D. (1983). Component display theory. In C.M. Reigeluth (Ed.), Instructional-design theories and models:
    An overview of their current status (Vol. I). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Merrill, M.D. (2002). A pebble-in-the-pond model for instructional design. Performance Improvement, 41(7),
    39–44.
Palincsar, A.S. (1998). Social constructivist perspectives on teaching and learning. Annual Review of Psychology,
    49, 345–375.
Papert, S. (1993a). Mindstorms: Children, computers, and powerful ideas (2nd ed.). New York, NY: Basic Books.
Papert, S. (1993b). The children’s machine: Rethinking schools in the age of the computer. New York, NY: Basic Books.
Pavlov, I.P. (1897/1902). The work of the digestive glands. London: Griffin.
Perry, William G. (1999). Forms of ethical and intellectual development in the college years. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-
    Bass Publishers.
                                                                             Theories of Learning and Instruction 51
Piaget, J. (1952). The origins of intelligence in children. New York, NY: International University Press.
Reigeluth, C.M. (1980). Meaningfulness and instruction: Relating what is being learned to what a student knows. New York,
   NY: Syracuse Univ., NY. School of Education.
Reigeluth, C.M. (1983). Instructional-design theories and models: An overview of their current status. Hillsdale, NJ:
   Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Reigeluth, C.M. (Ed.). (1999). Instructional-design theories and models, Vol. 2. A new paradigm of instructional theory (Vol.
   II). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Reigeluth, C.M. (1999). The elaboration theory: Guidance for scope and sequence decisions. In C.M. Reigeluth
   (Ed.), Instructional-design theories and models: A new paradigm of instructional theory (Vol. II, pp. 425–453). Mahwah,
   NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Reigeluth, C.M. (1999). What is instructional-design theory and how is it changing? In C.M. Reigeluth (Ed.),
   Instructional-design theories and models: A new paradigm of instructional theory (Vol. II, pp. 5–29). Mahwah, NJ:
   Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Reigeluth, C.M., Beatty, B.J., & Myers, R.D. (Eds.). (2017). Instructional-design theories and models, Volume IV: The
   learner-centered paradigm of education. New York, NY: Routledge.
Reigeluth, C.M., & Carr-Chellman, A.A. (2009a). Understanding instructional theory. In C.M. Reigeluth &
   A.A. Carr-Chellman (Eds.), Instructional-design theories and models: Building a common knowledge base (Vol. III, pp.
   3–26). New York, NY: Routledge.
Reigeluth, C.M., & Carr-Chellman, A.A. (Eds.). (2009b). Instructional-design theories and models: Building a common
   knowledge base (Vol. III). New York, NY: Routledge.
Reigeluth, C.M., & Moore, J. (1999). Cognitive education and the cognitive domain. In C.M. Reigeluth (Ed.),
   Instructional-design theories and models: A new paradigm of instructional theory (Vol. II, pp. 51–68). Mahwah, NJ:
   Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Romiszowski, A.J. (1981). Designing instructional systems: Decision making in course planning and curriculum design. New
   York, NY: Nichols Publishing.
Rumelhart, D.E. (1980). The building blocks of cognition. In R.J. Spiro, B.C. Bruce & W.F. Brewer (Eds.),
   Theoretical issues in reading comprehension (pp. 33–58). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Skinner, B.F. (1953). Science and human behavior. New York, NY: Macmillan.
Skinner, B.F. (1965). The science of learning and the art of teaching. Harvard Educational Review, 24(2), 86–97.
Sweller, J. (1994). Cognitive load theory, learning difficulty, and instructional design. Learning and Instruction,
   4(4), 295–312.
Thorndike, E.L. (1911). Animal intelligence: Experimental studies. New York, NY: Macmillan.
Thorndike, E.L. (1921). Educational Psychology, Volume II: The Psychology of Learning. New York, NY: Teachers
   College Columbia University.
van Merriënboer, J.J.G. (1997). Training complex cognitive skills: A four-component instructional design model for technical
   training. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Educational Technology Publications.
van Merriënboer, J.J.G., Clark, R.E., & de Croock, M.B.M. (2002). Blueprints for complex learning: The 4C/
   ID-model. Educational Technology Research and Development, 50(2), 39–64.
van Merriënboer, J.J.G., & Kirschner, P.A. (2007). Ten steps to complex learning. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
   Associates.
van Merriënboer, J.J.G., & Kirschner, P.A. (2013). Ten steps to complex learning: A systematic approach to four-
   component instructional design (2nd ed.). New York, NY: Routledge.
Vygotsky, L.S. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher psychological processes. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
   University Press.
Vygotsky, L.S. (1986). Thought and language. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Watson, J.B. (1924). Behaviorism. New York, NY: People’s Institute Publishing Company.
Weiner, B. (1972). Attribution theory, achievement motivation, and the educational process. Review of
   Educational Research, 42(2), 203–215.
Wenger, E. (1998). Communities of practice: Learning, meaning and identity. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
   Press.
Wertheimer, M. (1923). Laws of organization in perceptual forms. First published as Untersuchungen zur
   Lehre von der Gestalt II. Psycologische Forschung, 4(1), 301–350. Translation published in Ellis, W. (1938). A
   source book of Gestalt psychology (pp. 71–88). London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
4            Other Considerations for Design




Overview
In this chapter we offer nine additional major considerations for making good decisions
about designing instruction in all different contexts, and all eight are important elements
of our Holistic 4D Model introduced in Chapter 1 and elaborated in considerable detail in
the rest of this book. Design is concerned with both what to teach (which we call “content”
to refer to everything one teaches, such as information, skills, attitudes, habits, emotional
development, ethics, and so forth) and how to teach it. The nine additional major consid-
erations for designing instruction are:

    1.    Task vs. topic expertise
    2.    What to analyze
    3.    Just-in-time analysis
    4.    Subject-matter experts
    5.    Rapid prototyping
    6.    Creating a design document
    7.    Instructional approaches
    8.    Motivational strategies
    9.    Media selection

1. Task vs. Topic Expertise
Some people have placed great emphasis on the distinction between education and train-
ing, while others have been skeptical that it is an important difference. Those who see a
clear distinction argue that training focuses on improving the learner’s performance of a
job (or of specific tasks which are parts of that job), whereas education focuses on improv-
ing the learner’s understanding or knowledge of a subject (or of specific topics which are
component parts of that subject). Others argue that most worthwhile learning activities of
any complexity involve the learner in acquiring both knowledge and skills – the understand-
ing of topics which are relevant to a given situation, problem, or challenge and the ability
to use this understanding in the performance of relevant tasks (Romiszowski, 1981, 1986).
   There is some truth to both these viewpoints. Research has shown that these two major
kinds of learning outcomes – or expertise – require very different kinds of instructional
content and sequencing: task expertise and topic expertise1 (Reigeluth, 1999b).


1        “Expertise” is used here to denote a kind of learning outcome (or kind of knowledge or skill). Becoming an expert in
         a task requires a different kind of learning from becoming an expert in a topic.
                                                                  Other Considerations for Design 53
   Task expertise is goal-oriented knowledge. It is knowledge about how to accomplish
a goal, usually called a skill or higher-order thinking skill. It is sometimes called productive
knowledge because it entails performing a task. Examples are shown in Table 4.1 and are
contrasted with related areas of topic expertise.
   In contrast, topic expertise is general knowledge – it is descriptive rather than produc-
tive. It focuses more on understanding than doing. For example, understanding what a
recession is constitutes a small piece of topic expertise (but entails a lot more than being
able to state the definition of recession), whereas knowing how to get an economy out of
a recession is task expertise. Examples related to topic expertise are shown in Table 4.1.
   Task expertise is typically thought of as being developed through training, while topic
expertise is typically thought of as being developed through education, but not always.
Math skills, writing skills, and higher-order cognitive skills are a few kinds of task expertise
that are generally considered within the realm of education. And understanding of many
topics is important for task expertise, such as the principles of macroeconomics for getting
an economy out of a recession or learning theory for teacher development. Hence, task
and topic expertise must often both be developed together.
   Of course, these two kinds of expertise are interrelated and even interdependent.
Expertise in physics is largely topic expertise (but also involves some task expertise),
whereas expertise in engineering, which is strongly related to physics, is largely task exper-
tise (but also involves some topic expertise). Similarly, expertise in biology is primarily
topic expertise (with some task expertise), while expertise in medicine, which is strongly
related to it, is primarily task expertise (with some topic expertise). The same is true for
chemistry and chemical engineering, and for learning theory and instructional theory. For
example, schema theory proposes how people’s knowledge is organized within their heads
and how new knowledge is acquired through assimilation, accommodation, and restructur-
ing. It does not describe what methods of instruction to use to help people learn through
assimilation, accommodation, or restructuring – that is instructional theory. Therefore,
expertise in schema theory is mostly topic expertise.
   Romiszowski (1981) describes different processes for task analysis and topic analysis,
and Reigeluth (Leshin, Pollock, & Reigeluth, 1992; Myers & Reigeluth, 2017) describes
different instructional strategies for task and topic expertise, both of which we incorporate
in the Holistic 4D Model (see Chapters 5–7).

2. What to Analyze
What kinds of information should be collected and analyzed during the ID process?
Typically, after the Define phase (a performance analysis and instructional needs assess-
ment as described in Chapter 2), designing effective instruction requires the analysis of
content, learners, context, and resources, but these should not all be done before doing
any design activities (see Major Consideration #3).




                     Table 4.1 Examples of Topic Expertise and Task Expertise

                     Topic Expertise                    Task Expertise
                     Biology                            Medicine
                     Physics                            Engineering
                     Learning theory                    Instructional theory
54 Other Considerations for Design
Content
Content analysis is the process of defining the content to include in the instruction, includ-
ing both task analysis for task expertise and topic analysis for topic expertise. Although
content analysis is considered the most critical step in the instructional design process
(Jonassen, Tessmer, & Hannum, 1999), it is often poorly done. In fact, it appears to be
one of the most difficult and challenging activities for novice instructional designers. We
provide detailed guidance for analyzing content in Chapters 5, 6, and 7.

Learners
The main goal of learner analysis is to identify all learner characteristics, abilities, and
experiences that might influence the selection of instructional content and methods.
Conducting an analysis of the target learners allows you to base the instruction on their
current skills, knowledge, and attitudes. This increases the likelihood that the instruction
will include all content that should be taught and will not include content that should not
be taught. Consequently, learner analysis should be integrated with content analysis.
   Many characteristics or traits differentiate learners (e.g., age, gender, ethnicity, edu-
cation, language skills, previous experiences, interests, computer skills, etc.). Heinich,
Molenda, Russell, and Smaldino (1999) suggested that instructional designers initially con-
sider three categories of learner characteristics:

•   General characteristics: age, gender, ethnicity, education, language skills, work experi-
    ence, interests.
•   Specific entry competencies: prerequisite knowledge, skills, and attitudes that learners
    must possess to benefit from the instruction.
•   Learning styles: traits that refer to how learners approach learning tasks and process
    information and thereby influence which instructional methods will work well for
    each learner. Due to a lack of research evidence, there is considerable controversy
    about which learning styles influence how much learners benefit from any given
    instructional method – and, indeed, whether any do (Khazan, 2018).

Additional characteristics of learners include, but are not limited to, motivation, attitude
toward the subject, previous or current work experience, interests, reading ability, language
or cultural differences, physical characteristics (e.g., physical fitness, weight, disabilities),
computer skills, and specific motor skills.
   It is not helpful to analyze every type of learner characteristic, because relatively few
of them influence what kind of instruction will work best. Therefore, the most important
decisions in initiating a learner analysis concern (a) which learner characteristics to identify
and (b) how to collect the necessary data. Guidance for this is offered in Chapters 5–8.
Learner characteristics typically influence the motivational design of instruction and the
selection of examples that are both familiar and interesting to the learner.

Contexts
The purpose of a context analysis is to identify environmental factors that will influence
the design and delivery of instruction. You need to identify the factors that place limita-
tions or constraints on your design, as well as the factors that facilitate the design and
delivery. There are two major kinds of contexts: instructional and transfer. In Chapter 2,
we stated that Tessmer and Richey (1997) distinguished between orienting context and
                                                              Other Considerations for Design 55
transfer context. They defined the orienting context as preexisting conditions, such as
learners’ prerequisite skills, attitudes toward instruction, and organizational culture regard-
ing instruction. We find it helpful to talk in terms of content, learner, and resource analyses
rather than the lump term “orienting context analysis.” We also believe it is important to
analyze the instructional context, as well as the transfer context.
   Instructional context. Learning and instruction do not take place in a vacuum. They
are influenced by some environmental factors over which the designer has little control.
Therefore, you should identify the environmental factors so you can design instruction
that fits the constraints of the instructional environment. The environmental factors to
consider depend on design situations. When designing classroom instruction or training,
for example, you might need to consider such environmental factors as lighting, noise,
temperature, seating, table arrangements, equipment (e.g., projectors, tools), scheduling,
and meeting times. On the other hand, when designing online instruction, you should
consider other types of factors, including Internet access, computers, and software tools
available, keeping in mind that the organization offering the instruction may be able to
arrange for the availability of such things at the learners’ locations. Synchronous online
instruction requires consideration of still other factors. And blended instruction typically
requires consideration of all those types of factors. Factors that a designer can control
should be considered as methods, not context. Instructional context influences how to
teach much more than what to teach.
   Transfer context. Analyzing a transfer context, or performance environment (the
context in which the new learnings will be used, such as the work context for corporate
training), is important, especially when the goal of instruction or training focuses on the
improvement of performance or the application of newly learned knowledge and skills in
both familiar and new performance situations. For example, in the early stages of design-
ing instruction for technicians, one should analyze whether the workshop equipment and
tools available in the schools or training centers are sufficiently similar to, and compatible
with, those currently used in the relevant real-world context where the learners will work
once they qualify. New technologies often result in the instructional context falling way
behind the realities of the respective transfer context. This may pose some challenges for
your ID project. Transfer context influences what to teach far more than how to teach it.

Resources
Resource analysis is conducted to identify the resources needed and available, as well as
resource constraints, for both the ID process and the instructional context. In a large
ID team, the project manager is typically in charge of resource analysis, but instructional
designers should have a good understanding of the resources available for instructional
design. Keep in mind that the design of instruction, whether an extensive amount, like
an entire curriculum, or a smaller amount, like a half-day workshop, is limited by many
resource constraints. The ID process should be carefully planned to fit these resource
limits. Here are some critical questions to ask during resource analysis:

•   How much time and money do we have for the ID process and products?
•   What prior content analyses and existing instructional resources can we adopt or
    adapt?
•   What human resources do we need to design (and/or adapt) and create the instruction?
•   What types of equipment, facilities, or tools can we select for the ID process, given
    the budget?
56 Other Considerations for Design
•    What types of instructional media (e.g., advanced technologies) can we include in the
     product (instructional system), considering the development personnel and resources
     available?

The importance of asking and seeking realistic answers to such questions is illustrated by
studies of the resources used by real-world ID projects. Studies such as those published by
the Association for Training and Development (Kapp & Defelice, 2009; Defelice, 2018),
Chapman (2010), and the eLearning Guild (2002) report data on hundreds of projects,
involving several hundred instructional designers and developers who, together, were
responsible for producing many thousands of hours of instruction, delivered in various
formats. The common criterion of measurement used in these reports was the total time,
in hours, of all those involved in the project, to design and develop one hour of instruc-
tion. Table 4.2 is our summary of this large data base, organized in terms of average time
and the range of reported time investment to design, develop, and evaluate all components
for four typical instructional system categories. Projects report widely different amounts
of time invested per hour of instruction produced, but they are remarkably consistent in
terms of how many times more time was needed for successively more sophisticated
and technologically advanced instructional solutions. The simplest of e-learning instruc-
tion tends to require about twice the time investment of conventional, instructor-led train-
ing; interactive multimedia instructional systems typically require up to four times more
time; and full use of the latest educational technologies could need over ten times the time
investment.
   Resource analysis is done mostly at the beginning of the design phase because it can-
not really be done until the performance analysis and instructional needs analysis have
been completed. However, it should be periodically updated throughout the rest of the
ID project.

3. Just-in-Time Analysis
Traditionally, the ID process calls for completing all the analysis before beginning the
design. However, as design decisions are made, they narrow the subsequent design deci-
sions and therefore the information needed (analysis) to make those decisions. For exam-
ple, the choice of a kind of instructional sequence, such as a procedural sequence, narrows
the kind of content analysis that is needed, in this case a procedural analysis (which identi-
fies the steps in a procedure and the order those steps are performed in). If you do all the
analysis before any design, much of the information collected goes unused and additional
analysis is often needed.

Table 4.2 Typical Time Investment in Instructional Design and Development Projects

Hours of ID Per Hour of Instruction: A Review of Typical Case Studies            Average     Range
Instructor-led – including front end analysis, design, SME reviews, lesson       40 hrs./hr. 22–82 hrs./hr.
   plans, handouts, workbooks, PowerPoint presentations, slides, etc.
Self-instructional, minimally interactive, offline or online – including the     80 hrs./hr. 49–125 hrs./hr.
   above plus quality graphics, test questions, simple audio or video, etc.
Interactive multimedia – including any of the above plus online tests,           180 hrs./hr. 127–267 hrs./hr.
   exercises, simulations and liberal use of audio, video, animations, etc.
Highly interactive “state-of-the-art” multimedia – including complex             490 hrs./hr. 217–716 hrs./hr.
   simulations and games, use of virtual reality, “Second Life,” avatars, etc.
                                                                       Other Considerations for Design 57
   Therefore, the ID process can be much more efficient and effective by doing most of
the analysis “just in time” when it is needed, especially when you have easy access to sub-
ject-matter experts (see Major Consideration #4 next). This avoids performing unneces-
sary analysis and not conducting analysis that is needed. Also, just-in-time analysis greatly
enhances the rapid prototyping process (see Major Consideration #5).

4. Subject-Matter Experts (SMEs)
Table 4.1 mentions “SME reviews” as one essential component of instructional design and
development. What exactly is the function of the subject-matter expert in this process?
In most cases, instructional designers work with content in which they are not experts.
Therefore, it is necessary to interview one or more people who are experts in the content.
Careful selection of SMEs is crucial because many experts aren’t really experts. Interview
situations vary depending on the locations and availability of SMEs. Ideally, you will have
face-to-face meetings with SMEs, but if that is not feasible, you will have to communicate
with them with conference calls, video conferences, and such – and you are likely to use
email frequently either way. In terms of the number of SMEs, some large ID projects
involve numerous experts, while simple ID projects may involve only one (or preferably
two, to address idiosyncrasies).
    When possible, you should have SMEs as part of your development team to facilitate
frequent contact. In most cases, you must get all the information you need in a very limited
time. Therefore, you should seek other sources of subject-matter expertise before inter-
viewing the expert. Collect previous instructional materials, conduct a web search, and/
or review available resources to learn all you can about the content. Otherwise, it will take
longer for you to understand your experts during the interviews. Keep in mind that not all
experts can verbalize the task well. Most experts are often not consciously aware of all the
knowledge they possess (called “tacit knowledge”), so you may find newer experts to be
more aware of the knowledge they possess and the difficulties learners face. In any event,
it is crucial to develop good questions to elicit such knowledge. Table 4.3 provides some
general tips for the interviews.
    Working with SMEs effectively also demands some interactive or interpersonal skills on
the part of the instructional designer. One skill which helps to ensure that the designer cor-
rectly and fully understands the SME’s contributions, even if they are not clearly expressed

Table 4.3 Tips for Interviews with Subject-Matter Experts (SMEs)

Timing                 Tips
Before the Interview   • Research the subject matter
                       • Ask for any previous materials on the content
                       • Develop interview questions
During the Interview •    Listen actively
                     •    Take notes
                     •    Help SMEs articulate their knowledge
                     •    Seek clarification when necessary
                     •    Control the flow of the interview
                     •    Record the interview
After the Interview    • Review your notes and draft an initial content outline while your memory is fresh
                       • Schedule a follow up interview as necessary
                       • Confirm the accuracy of your analysis
58 Other Considerations for Design
at first, is “echoing.” The designer, before moving on to a further step in the interview,
repeats what the SME has just said, but using different words, sentence structures, or
examples. The SME then has to confirm or correct the designer’s version. In echoing what
was said by the SME, the designer will often prompt the SME into clarifying, correcting or
otherwise improving what was said previously. In addition, especially if it is impossible to
record a given conversation, the use of echoing gives the designer extra time to make notes
on what was said before moving on.
    Echoing is also useful when SMEs are for some reason unable or unwilling to “open
up” and “tell the whole story.” This may happen because the SMEs, due to their level
of expertise, just do not appreciate what aspects of the task are likely to be difficult for
novices to understand or perform – they omit aspects which to them seem too obvious
to be worth mentioning. It may also happen because the SME imagines that some aspects
are already known and understood by the designer. Sometimes it happens when the SME
is busy and so is keen to complete the interview as fast as possible and get back to other
activities. And, most seriously, it happens if SMEs feel that “revealing all” in some way
devalues their expertise, or even threatens their position in the organization. In this case,
the skilled analyst can use echoing in a way that conveys apparent misunderstandings, thus
intentionally adopting a position of inferiority. Reluctant SMEs will then usually “open
up” and “reveal all” to demonstrate their superiority.
    Sometimes you might serve as both the instructional designer and SME. Even in that
case, it is recommended that you find another content expert to review your content analy-
sis results, primarily to validate the accuracy and completeness of your content selection.

5. Rapid Prototyping
Rapid prototyping (RP) is an approach to the ID process that quickly produces a work-
ing model (prototype) of the instruction for review and modification before creating the
full-blown version of the instruction (Batane, 2010; Desrosier, 2011; Jones & Richey,
2000; Pham & Dimov, 2003; Tripp & Bichelmeyer, 1990). There are some similarities
between RP and agile software development (Allen & Sites, 2012; Schwaber & Beedle,
2002).
   There are three major benefits of RP:

 a. It helps ensure that instruction will be well aligned with the learners and their needs,
    because the instruction can be tried out with sample learners before most of it is fully
    designed and developed.
 b. It helps ensure that instruction will be well aligned with the client or owner of the
    need, because they will have an opportunity to review the prototype before the
    instruction is fully developed.
 c. It typically shortens the overall development time and lowers development costs,
    because revisions can be made early on before the expensive production process
    occurs. Prototype revisions can also guide the design of other parts of the instruction,
    reducing the need for extensive revisions.

We propose that there are two basic approaches to RP: quantitative reduction and qualita-
tive reduction of the instruction. In quantitative reduction, you create a prototype that is
one representative part of the whole instruction. You might design and develop one mod-
ule of a 14-module course, or test an even smaller component, such as one content artifact
(reading, video, etc.) representing other similar artifacts. In qualitative reduction, you
                                                              Other Considerations for Design 59
create a prototype that is a “quick and dirty” version of the entire instruction. You might
create a paper version of computer-based instruction before eventually programming it
with graphics and video. Of course, there is also a combination approach that does both
– a qualitative reduction on the representative part from a quantitative reduction.
    In all cases, the creation of the prototype is followed by formative evaluation (trying
out the prototype with some learners who are representative of the target population) and
client review. Then revisions are made in the prototype before full-blown production (in
the qualitative approach) and before designing and developing other parts of the whole
instruction (in the quantitative approach).

6. Creating a Design Document
A design document is a “blueprint” or written description of the instructional system.
Developing a design document is one of your major responsibilities, especially if you work
on large-scale ID projects in a team consisting of multiple professionals. Similar to a blue-
print of a house, a design document should specify what the instruction or training (the
building) will be like. Your design document will gradually expand from a fuzzy vision of
the instruction in the early stages of the design process, to detailed specifications in the
final stages. It is also helpful to include some information from your analysis and evalu-
ation activities in the document, making it an Analysis-Design-Evaluation (ADE) docu-
ment. Sample templates are provided for each stage of development of this document in
Chapters 5–8.
    The ADE documents become your guide as you continue to develop your instruction.
You can also create a client version to serve as a contract and vehicle of communication
between your design team and your client (even if it is a client within your organization).
It is very important to clearly describe your instructional design so that your design team
members and clients can easily understand and visualize your instruction, but you may
want to remove the analysis and evaluation parts of the ADE document and use language
and a level of detail that is tailored to that audience.

7. Instructional Approaches
Our digital-age society needs people who can take initiative, think critically and creatively,
and solve complex problems. Despite the changes in societal systems, our current paradigm
in education and training is still based on standardization, conformity, and compliance
(Reigeluth & Karnopp, 2013). Like the mass production of industrial-age manufacturing,
standardized education entails teaching a large group of learners the same content in the
same amount of time and seeks valid comparisons of learners with each other, which was
an important need in the industrial age. Learners are expected to sit down, be quiet, listen
to the instructor, and do what they are told to do. Corporate training has been quicker
than educational systems to transform from standardized, time-based, teacher-centered
instruction to personalized, competency-based, learner-centered instruction, but there are
currently more than 500 schools throughout the USA that have made this transformation,
as well as dozens of post-secondary institutions.
   The paradigm of instruction should change from standardization to customization
(including adaptive learning), from passive to active learning, and from teacher-centered
to learner-centered instruction (Reigeluth, 1999b; Reigeluth & Karnopp, 2013, 2020).
Learner-centered instruction is the only way to maximize every learner’s learning and meet
their needs in the digital age (Reigeluth, Myers, & Lee, 2017). Given that learner-centered
60 Other Considerations for Design
methods are almost always preferable to teacher-centered methods, and, given that most
readers are all too familiar with teacher-centered methods, we do not provide guidance for
teacher-centered ones in this book.
   Learner-centered instruction aims to foster the learning of all learners by focusing
equally on individual learners and learning (McCombs & Whisler, 1997). It also focuses on
developing real-world skills, such as higher-order thinking, problem solving, and decision-
making skills, in addition to content knowledge (Bransford, Brown, & Cocking, 2000;
McCombs & Whisler, 1997; Reigeluth, 1994). Based on a comprehensive literature review,
we identified the following six characteristics of LCI (An, 2012; An & Reigeluth, 2011):

•   Personalized and customized learning
•   Social and emotional support
•   Self-regulation (or self-direction)
•   Collaborative learning experiences
•   Authentic learning experiences
•   Assessment for learning, integrated with instruction

   There are several different LCI approaches, including competency-based learning,
learning by doing, case-based instruction, and other approaches.

Competency-Based Learning
Typically, education and training have been provided “with time as the constant” and
amount of learning as the variable. This does not promote consistently high levels of learn-
ing and performance. In competency-based learning, learning is the constant, and amount
of time is variable – whatever is needed to really learn what’s important. Therefore, learners
move forward only when they have mastered the content (and as soon as they have mas-
tered the content), rather than when a predetermined amount of time has passed (Block,
1971; Bloom, 1968, 1984; Carroll, 1963; Kulik, Kulik, & Bangert-Drowns, 1990). Given
that different people learn at different rates, the mastery approach means that you should
either customize the pace of instruction (vary the timeframe), or you should allow faster
learners to spend less time on the instruction (within a given timeframe). Online learning
is well suited to using customized pace and competency-based learning, but all too often
online instruction fails to realize this potential.

Learning by Doing
Learning by doing is often used as an umbrella term for learner-centered approaches that
emphasize experiential learning, including problem-based learning, project-based learning,
inquiry-based learning, task-centered instruction, and maker-based learning.2
   Problem-based learning (PBL). In the 1960s, PBL was first developed in medi-
cal education in response to learners’ poor clinical performance that resulted from the



2   In Chapter 3, we made a distinction between learning theories and instructional theories. Based on that distinction, the
    term, “problem-based learning” should not be understood to offer guidance about instructional methods for learning
    through problem solving. The proper term is “problem-based instruction.” However, popular usage of PBL has been
    to designate guidance about instruction, so we use PBL in this book instead of the more technically correct PBI. The
    same applies to project-based learning, inquiry-based learning, and maker-based learning.
                                                                Other Considerations for Design 61
overemphasis on memorization of factual knowledge in traditional health science educa-
tion (Barrows, 1986; Barrows & Tamblyn, 1980). PBL has become a primary instructional
method in medical education throughout the world, and it has also been widely adopted
by other disciplines (e.g., nursing, education, business administration, and architecture)
and for different learning levels (e.g., K-12 education, higher education, and corporate
training).
    Unlike traditional (teacher-centered) instructional methods, PBL begins with the presen-
tation of an authentic problem, which is complex, ill-defined, ill-structured, and open-ended.
The problem is chosen based on what content is important to learn, and learners no longer
passively receive content from the teacher. Instead, they actively engage in self-directed
learning and collaborative inquiry and research to identify learning issues and develop a via-
ble solution to the problem (Barrows, 2000; Hmelo-Silver, 2004; Savery, 2006, 2009; Savery
& Duffy, 1995). If designed and implemented effectively, PBL can promote in-depth under-
standing of content, foster self-directed learning, higher-order thinking, problem-solving,
and collaboration skills, and can provide an engaging and enjoyable learning environment
for both learners and teachers (Albanese & Mitchell, 1993; Barrows & Tamblyn, 1980;
Coles, 1985; Newble & Clarke, 1986; Norman & Schmidt, 1992; Vernon & Blake, 1993).
    By comparing and contrasting the findings of the meta-analytical research on the effec-
tiveness of PBL, Strobel and van Barneveld (2009) found that PBL is significantly more
effective than traditional instruction for long-term knowledge retention, performance
improvement, and satisfaction of learners and teachers, whereas traditional approaches are
more effective for short-term retention. Furthermore, with appropriate scaffolding (e.g.,
just-in-time tutorials), PBL can be a fairly efficient method for learner-centered instruc-
tion, partly due to enhanced learner motivation accelerating the learning.
    Project-based learning. Project-based learning is similar to problem-based learning in
that it uses authentic, real-world tasks and takes a learner-centered approach. In fact, problem-
based learning and project-based learning are often used as synonyms. However, project-based
learning is different from problem-based learning in that it focuses more on the creation of
end products or artifacts rather than on solving a problem. In project-based learning, learners
are usually provided with specifications for a desired end product, and the expected outcomes
drive and shape the learning process (Blumenfeld et al., 1991; Buck Institute for Education,
2012; Savery, 2006). In more open-ended learning environments, learners are encouraged to
design their own projects, including developing specifications for end products.
    Inquiry-based learning (IBL). IBL is a learner-centered approach that begins with a
question, like “Where does the white go when snow melts?” Tapping into learners’ natu-
ral curiosity, it actively involves learners in questioning, investigation, knowledge crea-
tion, discussion, and reflection. In IBL, learners search for and evaluate information, use
the information to answer questions, and create new knowledge through the inquiry and
research process. Like problem- and project-based learning, IBL requires higher-order
thinking, such as analysis, synthesis, and evaluation, and fosters real-world skills, such as
critical thinking and problem solving. While IBL has been extensively used in science edu-
cation, it can be applied to all areas of learning (Bateman, 1990; Bruce & Davidson, 1996;
Lee, 2004; Prince & Felder, 2006).
    Task-centered instruction (TCI). TCI is a learner-centered approach that prescribes
the use of the following five elements (Francom, 2017; Merrill, 2002, 2007):

•   Learning tasks
•   Activation
•   Demonstration/modeling
62 Other Considerations for Design
•   Application
•   Integration/exploration

TCI stems from several theories and models, including first principles of instruction
(Merrill, 2002, 2007), the four-component instructional design model (van Merriënboer,
1997; van Merriënboer & Kirschner, 2007, 2013), elaboration theory (Reigeluth, 1979,
1999a), and cognitive apprenticeship (Brown, Collins, & Duguid, 1989; Collins, Brown, &
Holum, 1991). Similar to other learner-centered approaches, TCI focuses on the applica-
tion and transfer of knowledge to realistic contexts by having learners apply their knowl-
edge and skills to complete whole tasks, often real-world tasks. However, unlike pure PBL,
it aims to make learning more efficient and increase the chances that learners gain target
concepts and skills through demonstration and modeling (Collins et al., 1991; Francom,
2017; Merrill, 2002, 2007).
    Maker-based learning. Maker-based learning, or learning by making, is rooted in con-
structionism, which suggests that learners learn best when they are actively engaged in
the construction or creation of concrete and meaningful artifacts (Harel & Papert, 1991;
Papert, 1980). In maker-based learning environments, learners learn by making physi-
cal artifacts that are personally meaningful and valuable. Learning through doing, learn-
ing situated within a community, and self-directed learning are highly valued (McKay &
Glazewski, 2017).

Case-Based Instruction (CBI)
The use of cases in teaching and learning began at Harvard Law School in the 1870s, and
the instructional method is routinely used in schools of law, medicine, and business (Lynn,
1999). Although case-based instruction is generally considered a learner-centered instruc-
tional method, cases can be used in teacher-centered instruction (e.g., lectures). According
to Jonassen (2004), cases can be used in three different ways:
•   Cases can function as exemplars, exemplifying problem-solving practices in direct
    teaching
•   Cases can function as instructional support during problem-solving activities
•   Cases can be used to represent problems to learners to be solved
Therefore, whether CBI is learner-centered depends on how it is implemented. In learner-
centered CBI, learners analyze complex, authentic case studies of historical or hypothetical
situations that involve problem solving and decision making. The cases should be authen-
tic and representative of situations and dilemmas that are likely to be faced by profession-
als. Unlike the problems used in PBL, however, cases tend to be relatively well-structured
and provide rich contextual details (Lundeberg, Levin, & Harrington, 1999; Lynn, 1999;
Prince & Felder, 2006).

Other Approaches
Scenario-based eLearning. By using realistic scenarios that mimic real-world work situ-
ations or challenges, scenario-based eLearning provides an authentic and engaging context
for instruction that has some elements of learning by doing and allows learners to learn
from their mistakes by providing feedback on their decisions. Scenario-based learning
is well suited to teach soft skills such as leadership, communication, conflict resolution,
                                                              Other Considerations for Design 63
and problem-solving skills. Scenarios are typically presented as interactive animations with
vector-based graphics or still images, and sometimes in a video format. Some scenario
videos are created with real actors, while others are developed using static images. In order
to create emotionally engaging scenarios, it is important to have a good storyline and use
characters, images, and backgrounds that are industry specific and relatable to learners
(Gutierrez, 2015; Pappas, 2015).
    Self-paced eLearning. Learners are allowed to work at their own pace within cer-
tain parameters. Self-paced training is usually implemented in an eLearning format. With
self-paced eLearning, learners can learn and update their knowledge and skills at times
and places convenient to them. Also, self-paced instruction is very effective for ensuring
mastery by all learners.
    Flipped classroom. A flipped classroom reverses the traditional classroom in that
learners review instructional content (e.g., online lectures) prior to class, and class time is
used to engage learners in meaningful, learner-centered tasks that may have traditionally
been considered homework. The flipped classroom approach has been used at all grade
levels (K-16) (Bergmann & Sams, 2012; Brame, 2013; Lage, Platt, & Treglia, 2000; Strayer,
2007), but it can also be used in teacher-centered instruction.
    Game-based training. More and more organizations are using games to better train
their employees. Games have been increasingly used in K-16 education as well. While many
games don’t involve learning by doing in simulated authentic contexts, a well-designed
game can enhance learner engagement, provide situated learning experiences and authen-
tic practice in thinking and working in specific roles and contexts, and foster real-world
skills (An & Bonk, 2009; Gee, 2005; Myers & Reigeluth, 2017; Shaffer, Squire, Halverson,
& Gee, 2005), in which case it is truly a form of learning by doing.
    Gamification. Gamification ( Garris, Ahlers, & Driskell, 2002; Kapp, 2017, 2012; Salen,
2008) refers to the use of game elements or mechanics to motivate people to achieve their
goals. Gamification is often used to change behaviors, develop skills, and drive innova-
tion. Although gamification has tremendous potential, it is suffering from growing pains.
Gartner predicted that 80% of gamified efforts will fail due to poor design (Burke, 2014).
Chou (2015) argues that gamification is so much more than points, badges, and leader-
boards and requires sophisticated design. His gamification framework, called Octalysis
(see next section), provides research-based guidelines and tips for gamification.
    Social learning takes place in most, if not all, learner-centered approaches, usually in
the form of small collaborative teams. Also, it is important to keep in mind that combina-
tions of approaches are often used in a given ID project. In a learner-centered approach
that involves learning-by-doing, it is usually better to organize instruction around authen-
tic tasks or projects that engage learners in learning-by-doing. More is said about this in
chapters 5 and 6.

8. Motivational Strategies
As you well know, motivation plays a significant role in learning. What strategies will you
use to motivate your learners? Keep in mind that extrinsic motivators (usually rewards of
various kinds) reduce intrinsic motivation in learners (Ryan & Deci, 2000). It is typically
better to use intrinsic motivators, especially if you want the learners to continue learning
after the instruction is over. You should develop specific motivational strategies when
designing instruction. Learning by doing is one powerful motivational strategy. The fol-
lowing are some others you might want to consider.
64 Other Considerations for Design
   Needs theory. McClelland’s (1987) needs theory identifies three fundamental human
needs (or motivators): achievement, affiliation, and power. Need for achievement can
be addressed by using competency-based education. Mastering a competency provides a
powerful sense of achievement that motivates most learners. Need for affiliation can be
addressed by using collaborative learning, primarily in the form of team-based projects.
Working with teammates can be a powerful motivator for most learners. Finally, need for
power can be addressed through self-directed learning – allowing learners to choose goals,
projects, scaffolding, assessments, and reflection. Empowerment is a powerful motivator
for most learners.
   The Attention, Relevance, Confidence, and Satisfaction (ARCS) model. The
ARCS model, developed by John Keller, defines four major components of motivation:
Attention, Relevance, Confidence, and Satisfaction. These components are the result of a
synthesis of the research on human motivation. Further, the ARCS model provides a set
of strategies to use to enhance the motivational appeal of instruction for each of the four
components (Keller, 1983, 1987, 2010). Table 4.4 summarizes the ARCS components and
strategies.
    Self-determination theory (SDT). Self-determination theory was developed by Deci
and Ryan (1985). As a theory of motivation, it distinguishes between intrinsically moti-
vated behaviors, which are performed out of interest and satisfy the innate psychological
needs for competence and autonomy, and extrinsically motivated behaviors, which are
executed because they are instrumental to some separable consequence.

•    Intrinsically motivated behaviors are the prototype of self-determined behavior.
•    Extrinsically motivated behaviors can vary in the extent to which they represent self-
     determination. They can become more self-determined through internalization and
     integration.



Table 4.4 ARCS Components and Strategies

Category       Strategies
Attention      A1 Perceptual arousal – use novelty and surprise to gain interest
               A2 Inquiry arousal – stimulate curiosity by posing challenging questions or problems
               A3 Variability – vary instructional methods and media
Relevance      R1 Goal orientation – provide the objectives and utility of the instruction, and either present
                  goals or have learners define them
               R2 Motive matching – use instructional strategies that match learner motives and values
               R3 Familiarity – make the materials familiar by providing concrete examples and analogies
                  related to the learners’ backgrounds and/or experiences
Confidence     C1 Learning requirements – make learners aware of learning and performance requirements
               C2 Success opportunities – enhance learners’ beliefs in their competence by providing
                  multiple, challenging experiences that increase learning success
               C3 Personal control – use strategies that allow personal control whenever possible, and
                  provide feedback that attributes success to personal effort
Satisfaction   S1 Intrinsic reinforcement – encourage and support intrinsic enjoyment of the learning
                  experience
               S2 Extrinsic rewards – use verbal praise, real or symbolic rewards, and incentives
               S3 Equity – make performance requirements consistent with stated expectations, and use
                  consistent standards for all learners’ tasks and accomplishments
                                                              Other Considerations for Design 65
In the context of education, SDT suggests that learning environments can facilitate intrin-
sic motivation by supporting the needs for the following essential elements (Ryan & Deci,
2000):

•   Competence (e.g., optimal difficulty of challenges and feedback)
•   Relatedness (e.g., learners’ feeling respected by the teacher or trainer)
•   Autonomy (e.g., choices and self-direction)

Octalysis. Yu-Kai Chou (2015), a well-known gamification expert, views gamification
as a human-focused design process that focuses on human feelings and motivations as
opposed to function-focused design that focuses on efficiency (e.g., getting the job done
quickly). Based on extensive gamification research and study, Chou developed a gam-
ification framework called Octalysis, originally as a model for the design of games for
entertainment. However, Chou argues that the model can be used to design motivational
experiences of various types, including learning experiences.
    The Octalysis framework consists of the following eight core drives:

    Core Drive 1: epic meaning and calling
    Core Drive 2: development and accomplishment
    Core Drive 3: empowerment of creativity and feedback
    Core Drive 4: ownership and possession
    Core Drive 5: social influence and relatedness
    Core Drive 6: scarcity and impatience
    Core Drive 7: unpredictability and curiosity
    Core Drive 8: loss and avoidance

As Chou pointed out, gamification places the most emphasis on human motivation.
His Octalysis framework provides a number of research-based motivational strategies.
Indeed, the eight “core drives” should be understood as eight powerful motivators which
may lead one to participate and get involved in the game – the “game of learning” among
others.

9. Media Selection
Media selection is an important part of the design process, along with the design, devel-
opment, and production of the selected media. However, it is helpful to understand
that media typically influence efficiency and appeal, not effectiveness, of the instruction
(Clark, 1983, 1985). “The message, not the medium, is what teaches” (Romiszowski,
1988, p. 60).
   Fortunately, media selection has become increasingly more flexible due to the con-
vergence of media in a single digital system. Not long ago, designers often had to choose
between such alternatives as print, radio, TV, film, and computer. Now, all of these alter-
natives and other new media are available on a digital device, often at a no or lower cost
than through means available at the time. This makes it possible to combine and alternate
among media, so designers are not so restricted as before. In addition, there are now
numerous social media that promote social interaction and collaboration and allow learn-
ers to become knowledge creators and producers (Brown & Adler, 2008; Downes, 2005;
Richardson, 2009). Consequently, you do not need to commit to certain media so early in
the design process.
66 Other Considerations for Design
   At the top level of design, there are two major questions to address. One is what would
be feasible? Criteria include:

•   affordable/available (considering both capital costs and operating costs)
•   cost-effective
•   administratively feasible and
•   practically feasible (for learners and teachers).

This is media selection by rejection (Romiszowski, 1988). The other question is what
would be ideal? Criteria include:

•   ideal for the content (given the affordances needed – e.g., based on the nature of the
    performance, tools needed, and so forth)
•   ideal for the instructional methods (given the affordances needed – e.g., interaction,
    discussion, motion, color, and such)
•   ideal for the learners (given any special characteristics – e.g., poor reading skills, physi-
    cal disabilities, and so forth and
•   ideal for the teachers (given their media skills, media preferences, teaching logistics,
    and such).

This is media selection by optimization (Romiszowski, 1988).
  At the mid-level of design, it is helpful to consider the following questions:

•   What sensory channels are required by the content: hearing (audio), seeing, (still or
    motion visuals), or touching (tactile)?
•   What learner performance and instructor feedback capabilities are needed?
•   What preferences do learners have for particular media?
•   Who needs to control the media: teacher or learner?
•   What collaboration capabilities should the media have: none (for individual use) or
    many (for collaborative use)?
•   What other capabilities (e.g., content creation and sharing capabilities) should the
    media have to facilitate learner-centered instruction?
•   How easy should it be to modify the content and/or instructional methods?

During the selection process, it helps to understand that some media characteristics are
essential, such as audio for music instruction and motion visuals for manual skills, and
some are optional, because they are attractive or address learner or teacher preferences but
do not have significant impact on learning. Selection decisions should be made on all three
levels of design, but early decisions limit later decisions, so you should typically delay the
decisions as long as possible (Romiszowski, 1988). While we provide some guidance for
media selection on all three levels of design (see Chapters 5–7), you can find much more
useful guidance (though somewhat dated) in Romiszowski (1988).

Where Are We?
This chapter has described nine major considerations to take into account when design-
ing instruction, in addition to categories of learning, learning theories, and instructional
theories briefly described in Chapter 3. Particularly important are the two kinds of exper-
tise discussed in this chapter: task expertise and topic expertise. Different ID processes
                                                                       Other Considerations for Design 67

Table 4.5 ADE Process for Task Expertise and Topic Expertise (Differences Are in Bold)

             Task Expertise                                  Topic Expertise
Top Level    1. Select and sequence top-level content        1. Select and sequence top-level content
  Ch. 5      2. Plan high-level instructional methods        2. Plan high-level instructional methods
             3. Formatively evaluate and document the        3. Formatively evaluate and document the
                top-level design                                top-level design
Mid Level    1. Identify and sequence versions of each       1. Identify and sequence applications of
  Ch. 6         task                                            each topic
             2. Identify variations within each version      2. Identify variations within each
                and create designer objectives                  application and create designer objectives
             3. Formatively evaluate the findings            3. Formatively evaluate the findings
             4. Develop the learner objectives for each      4. Develop the learner objectives for each
                version                                         topic
             5. Design learner assessments for each          5. Design learner assessments for
                version                                         each topic
             6. Design the ways that learning by doing       6. Design the ways that learning by doing
                will be accomplished for each version           will be accomplished for each topic
             7. Select media in general for the version      7. Select media in general for the application
             8. Formatively evaluate and document the        8. Formatively evaluate and document the
                results                                         results
Lower        1. Select and sequence the organizing           1. Select and sequence the organizing
  Level         content for each version of the task            content for each topic
  Ch. 7      2. Select and classify the supporting content   2. Select and classify the supporting content
                for each version                                for each topic
             3. Sequence the supporting content for each     3. Sequence the supporting content for each
                version                                         topic
             4. Evaluate and document the findings           4. Evaluate and document the findings
             5. Identify resource requirements,              5. Identify resource requirements,
                availability, and existing instruction for      availability, and existing instruction for
                each version                                    each topic
             6. Revise and elaborate the instruction and     6. Revise and elaborate the instruction and
                assessments for each version                    assessments for each topic
             7. Formatively evaluate the ADE document        7. Formatively evaluate the ADE document
             8. Begin developing the implementation          8. Begin developing the implementation
                plan, and update the project management         plan, and update the project management
                plan                                            plan
   Ch. 8    Detailed guidance is provided for Lower-Level Step 6: Revise and Elaborate the Instruction
            and Assessments for Each Version/Topic. It includes instructional strategies for:
              • Remembering information
              • Understanding relationships
              • Applying skills and higher-order skills
              • Acting on attitudes or values



are required for these two kinds of expertise. The next three chapters provide guidance
to design instruction for both task expertise and topic expertise for top-level design
(Chapter 5), mid-level design (Chapter 6), and lower-level design (Chapters 7 and 8).
Table 4.5 provides a summary of the design process for each kind of expertise. The activi-
ties are numbered within each level to facilitate cross-referencing, but please keep in mind
68 Other Considerations for Design
that, while the activities are loosely done in a sequence, there is a lot of looping back to
earlier activities and simultaneous performance of some activities.
   Develop and Deploy are addressed in Chapters 9–12.

Exercises
Here again we offer suggestions for a professor using this book as a textbook in a course,
to help the students understand more deeply the contents of this chapter. We suggest that
you keep the same teams of about three students each to continue to work on their ID
projects throughout the course. However, these exercises can be done individually by any
reader who wants to deepen their understanding and skills.

 1. Have each team prepare a report that describes:
    • Whether task expertise or topic expertise should be the dominant content for its
        project
    • The target learners, contextual factors, and resources for its project (on a prelimi-
        nary, general level)
    • Who will be the SME for its project
    • How important motivational strategies will be for its target learners
 2. Have each team offer suggestions for improvement for the report of one or two other
    teams before you review and provide feedback to the students
 3. Have a whole-class, synchronous discussion of the pros and cons of
    • Just-in-time analysis
    • Each kind of rapid prototyping (qualitative reduction and quantitative reduction)
    • Learner-centered versus teacher-centered instruction

References
Albanese, M.A., & Mitchell, S. (1993). Problem-based learning: A review of literature on its outcomes and
   implementation issues. Academic Medicine, 68(1), 52–79.
Allen, M., & Sites, R. (2012). Leaving ADDIE for SAM: An agile model for developing the best learning resources.
   Alexandria, VA: ASTD Press.
An, Y. (2012). Learner-centered technology integration. In V.C.X. Wang (Ed.), Encyclopedia of e-leadership,
   counseling and training. Hersey, PA: IGI Global.
An, Y., & Bonk, C.J. (2009). Finding that SPECIAL PLACE: Designing digital game-based learning
   environments. TechTrends, 53(3), 43–48.
An, Y., & Reigeluth, C.M. (2011). Creating technology-enhanced, learner-centered classrooms: K-12 teachers’
   beliefs, perceptions, barriers, and support needs. Journal of Digital Learning in Teacher Education, 28(2), 54–62.
Barrows, H.S. (1986). A taxonomy of problem-based learning methods. Medical Education, 20(6), 481–486.
Barrows, H.S. (2000). Problem-based learning applied to medical education. Springfield, IL: Southern Illinois University
   School of Medicine.
Barrows, H., & Tamblyn, R. (1980). Problem-based learning: An approach to medical education. New York, NY:
   Springer.
Batane, T. (2010). Rapid prototyping for designing and delivering technology-based lessons. In M. Orey, S.A.
   Jones, & R.M. Branch (Eds.) Educational media and technology yearbook (Vol. 35, pp. 45–55). New York, NY:
   Springer US.
Bateman, W. (1990). Open to question: The art of teaching and learning by inquiry. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Bergmann, J., & Sams, A. (2012). Flip your classroom: Reach every student in every class every day. Washington, DC:
   International Society for Technology in Education.
Block, J.H. (1971). Mastery learning: Theory and practice. New York, NY: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, Inc.
Bloom, B.S. (1968). Learning for mastery. Evaluation Comment, 1(1), 1–12.
                                                                                Other Considerations for Design 69
Bloom, B.S. (1984). The 2 sigma problem: The search for methods of group instruction as effective as one-to-
   one tutoring. Educational Researcher, 13(6), 4–16.
Blumenfeld, P., Soloway, E., Marx, R., Krajcik, J., Guzdial, M., & Palincsar, A. (1991). Motivating project-
   based learning: Sustaining the doing, supporting the learning. Educational Psychologist, 26(3&4), 369–398.
Brame, C. (2013). Flipping the classroom. Vanderbilt University Center for Teaching. Retrieved from https://wp
   0.vanderbilt.edu/cft/guides-sub-pages/flipping-the-classroom/.
Bransford, J.D., Brown, A.L., & Cocking, R.R. (2000). How people learn: Brain, mind, experience, and school.
   Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
Brown, J.S., & Adler, R.P. (2008). Minds on fire: Open education, the long tail, and learning 2.0. EDUCAUSE
   Review, 43(1), 17–32.
Brown, J., Collins, A., & Duguid, P. (1989). Situated cognition of learning. Educational Researcher, 18(1), 32–42.
Bruce, B.C., & Davidson, J. (1996). An inquiry model for literacy across the curriculum. Journal of Curriculum
   Studies, 28(3), 281–300.
Buck Institute for Education. (2012). What is PBL? Retrieved from http://www.bie.org/about/what_is_pbl.
Burke, B. (2014). Gamify: How gamification motivates people to do extraordinary things. Brookline, MA: Bibliomotion.
Carroll, J.B. (1963). A model of school learning. Teachers College Record, 64(8), 723–733.
Chapman, B. (2010). How long does it take to create learning? [Research Study]. Published by Chapman
   Alliance LLC. Retrieved from www.chapmanalliance.com.
Chou, Y. (2015). Actionable gamification: Beyond points, badges, and leaderboards. Fremont, CA: Octalysis Media.
Coles, C.R. (1985). Differences between conventional and problem-based curricula in their students'
   approaches to studying. Medical Education, 19(4), 308–309.
Collins, A., Brown, J.S., & Holum, A. (1991). Cognitive apprenticeship: Making thinking visible. American
   Educator, 15(3), 6–11, 38–39.
Deci, E.L., & Ryan, R.M. (1985). The general causality orientations scale: Self-determination in personality.
   Journal of Research in Personality, 19(2), 109–134
Defelice, R. (2018). How long to develop one hour of training: Updated for 2017. Retrieved from https://www.td.org
   /insights/how-long-does-it-take-to-develop-one-hour-of-training-updated-for-2017.
Desrosier, J. (2011). Rapid prototyping reconsidered. Journal of Continuing Higher Education, 59(3), 135–145.
Downes, S. (2005). E-learning 2.0. eLearn magazine. Retrieved from http://www.elearnmag.org/.
Francom, G.M. (2017). Principles for task-centered instruction. In C.M. Reigeluth, B.J. Beatty & R.D. Myers
   (Eds.), Instructional-design theories and models: The learner-centered paradigm of education (Vol. IV, pp. 65–92). New
   York, NY: Routledge.
Garris, R., Ahlers, R., & Driskell, J.E. (2002). Games, motivation, and learning: A research and practice model.
   Simulation and Gaming, 33(4), 441–467.
Gee, J.P. (2005). Good video games and good learning. Phi Kappa Phi Forum, 85(2), 33–37.
Gutierrez, K. (2015). A 5-step plan to create your own scenario-based elearning course. Retrieved from https://www.shi
   ftelearning.com/blog/a-5-step-plan-to-create-your-own-scenario-based-elearning-course.
Harel, I., & Papert, S. (1991). Software design as learning environment. In I. Harel & S. Papert (Eds.), Children
   designers: Interdisciplinary constructions for learning and knowing mathematics in a computer-rich school (pp. 41–85).
   Noorwood: Ablex.
Heinich, R., Molenda, M., Russell, J.D., & Smaldino (1999). Instructional media and technologies for learning (6th ed.).
   Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice H.
Hmelo-Silver, C.E. (2004). Problem-based learning: What and how do students learn? Educational Psychology
   Review, 16(3), 235–266.
Jonassen, D.H. (2004). Learning to solve problems: An instructional design guide. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Jonassen, D.H., Tessmer, M., & Hannum, W.H. (1999). Task analysis methods for instructional design. Mahwah, NJ:
   Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Jones, T.S., & Richey, R.C. (2000). Rapid prototyping methodology in action: A developmental study.
   Educational Technology Research and Development, 48(2), 1042–1629.
Kapp, K.M. (Ed.). (2012). The gamification of learning and instruction: Game-based methods and strategies for training and
   education. New York, NY: Pfeiffer.
Kapp, K.M. (2017). Gamification designs for instruction. In C.M. Reigeluth, B.J. Beatty & R.D. Myers (Eds.),
   Instructional-design theories and models, Volume IV: The learner-centered paradigm of education (Vol. IV, pp. 351–383).
   New York, NY: Routledge.
70 Other Considerations for Design
Kapp, K.M., & Defelice, R.A. (2009, August 31). Time to develop one hour of training. Retrieved from the Association
   for Talent website https://www.td.org/Publications/Newsletters/Learning-Circuits/Learning CircuitsAr
   chives/2009/08/Time-to-Develop-One-Hour-of-Training.
Keller, J.M. (1983). Motivational design of instruction. In C.M. Reigeluth (Ed.), Instructional-design theories and
   models: An overview of their current status (pp. 386–434). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Keller, J.M. (1987). Development and use of the ARCS Model of instructional design. Journal of Instructional
   Development, 10(3), 2–10.
Keller, J.M. (2010). Motivational design for learning and performance. New York, NY: Springer.
Khazan, O. (2018). The myth of ‘learning styles’. Retrieved from https://www.theatlantic.com/science/archive/2
   018/04/the-myth-of-learning-styles/557687/.
Kulik, C.-L. C., Kulik, J.A., & Bangert-Drowns, R.L. (1990). Effectiveness of mastery learning programs: A
   meta-analysis. Review of Educational Research, 60(2), 265–299. doi:10.3102/00346543060002265.
Lage, M.J., Platt, G.J., & Treglia, M. (2000). Inverting the classroom: A gateway to creating an inclusive learning
   environment. The Journal of Economic Education, 31(1), 30–43.
Lee, V.S. (Ed.). (2004). Teaching and learning through inquiry: A guidebook for institutions and instructors. Sterling, VA:
   Stylus.
Leshin, C.B., Pollock, J., & Reigeluth, C.M. (1992). Instructional design strategies and tactics. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
   Educational Technology Publications.
Lundeberg, M., Levin, B., & Harrington, H. (1999). Who learns what from cases and how? The Research Base for
   teaching and learning with cases. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Lynn, L. (1999). Teaching and learning with cases: A guidebook. Chatham House Publishers, Seven Bridges Press, LLC.
McClelland, D. (1987). Human motivation. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
McCombs, B.L., & Whisler, J.S. (1997). The learner-centered classroom and school: Strategies for increasing student
   motivation and achievement. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
McKay, C.S., & Glazewski, K.D. (2017). Designing maker-based instruction. In C.M. Reigeluth, B.J. Beatty
   & R.D. Myers (Eds.), Instructional-design theories and models, Volume IV: The learner-centered paradigm of education
   (Vol. IV, pp. 145–172). New York, NY: Routledge.
Merrill, M.D. (2002). First principles of instruction. Educational Technology Research and Development, 50(3), 43–59.
Merrill, M.D. (2007). First principles of instruction: A synthesis. In R.A. Reiser & J.V. Dempsey (Eds.),
   Trends and issues in instructional design and technology (2nd ed., pp. 62–71). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Merrill/
   Prentice-Hall.
Myers, R.D., & Reigeluth, C.M. (2017). Designing games for learning. In C.M. Reigeluth, B.J. Beatty & R.D.
   Myers (Eds.), Instructional-design theories and models, Vol. IV: The learner-centered paradigm of education (pp. 205–
   242). New York, NY: Rougledge.
Newble, D.I., & Clarke, R.M. (1986). The approaches to learning of students in a traditional and in an
   innovative problem-based medical school. Medical Education, 20(4), 267–273.
Norman, G.R., & Schmidt, H.G. (1992). The psychological basis of problem-based learning: A review of the
   evidence. Academic Medicine, 67(9), 557–565.
Papert, S. (1980). Mindstorms. New York, NY: Basic Books.
Pappas, C. (2015). 5 Tips to develop effective scenario-based online training. Retrieved from https://elearningindustry
   .com/5-tips-to-develop-effective-scenario-based-online-training.
Pham, D., & Dimov, S. (2003). Rapid prototyping: A time compression tool. Ingenia, 17, 43–48.
Prince, M., & Felder, R.M. (2006). Inductive teaching and learning methods: Definitions, comparisons, and
   research bases. Journal of Engineering Education, 95(2), 123–138.
Reigeluth, C. M. (1979). In search of a better way to organize instruction: The elaboration theory. Journal of
   Instructional Development, 2(3),8–15.
Reigeluth, C.M. (1994). Envisioning a new system of education. In C.M. Reigeluth & R.J. Garfinkle (Eds.),
   Systemic change in education (pp. 59–70). Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Educational Technology Publications.
Reigeluth, C.M. (1999a). The elaboration theory: Guidance for scope and sequence decisions. In C.M. Reigeluth
   (Ed.), Instructional-design theories and models: A new paradigm of instructional theory (Vol. II, pp. 425–453). Mahwah,
   NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Reigeluth, C.M. (1999b). What is instructional-design theory and how is it changing? In C.M. Reigeluth (Ed.),
   Instructional-design theories and models: A new paradigm of instructional theory (pp. 1–29). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
   Erlbaum Associates.
                                                                                        Other Considerations for Design 71
Reigeluth, C.M., & Karnopp, J.R. (2013). Reinventing schools: It’s time to break the mold. Lanham, MD: Rowman &
    Littlefield Publishing Group.
Reigeluth, C.M., & Karnopp, J.R. (2020). Vision and action: Reinventing schools through personalized competency-based
    education. Bloomington, IN: Marzano Resources.
Reigeluth, C.M., Myers, R.D., & Lee, D. (2017). The learner-centered paradigm of education. In C.M. Reigeluth,
    B.J. Beatty & R.D. Myers (Eds.), Instructional-design theories and models: The learner-centered paradigm of education
    (Vol. IV, pp. 5–32). New York, NY: Routledge.
Richardson, W. (2009). Blogs, wikis, podcasts, and other powerful web tools for classrooms (2nd ed.). Thousand Oaks,
    CA: Corwin Press.
Romiszowski, A.J. (1981). Designing instructional systems: Decision making in course planning and curriculum design. New
    York, NY: Nichols Publishing.
Romiszowski, A.J. (1986). Developing auto-instructional materials: From programmed texts to CAL and interactive video.
    New York, NY: Nichols Publishing.
Romiszowski, A.J. (1988). The selection and use of instructional media. New York, NY: Nichols Publishing.
Ryan, R.M., & Deci, E.L. (2000). Self-determination theory and the facilitation of intrinsic motivation, social
    development, and well-being. American Psychologist, 55(1), 68–78.
Salen, K. (Ed.). (2008). The ecology of games: Connecting youth, games, and learning. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Savery, J. (2006). Overview of problem-based learning: Definitions and distinctions. Interdisciplinary Journal of
    Problem-Based Learning, 1(1). Retrieved from https://docs.lib.purdue.edu/ijpbl/vol1/iss1/3/.
Savery, J.R. (2009). Problem-based approach to instruction. In C.M. Reigeluth & A.A. Carr-Chellman (Eds.),
    Instructional-design theories and models: Building a common knowledge base (Vol. III, pp. 143–165). New York, NY:
    Routledge.
Savery, J., & Duffy, T. (1995). Problem-based learning: An instructional model and its constructivist
    framework. In B. Wilson (Ed.), Constructivist learning environments: Case studies in instructional design (pp. 135–
    148). Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Educational Technology Publications.
Schwaber, K., & Beedle, M. (2002). Agile software development with scrum. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Shaffer, D.W., Squire, K.R., Halverson, R., & Gee, J.P. (2005). Video games and the future of learning. Phi
    Delta Kappan, 87(2), 104–111.
Strayer, J. (2007). The effects of the classroom flip on the learning environment: A comparison of learning activity in a traditional
    classroom and a flip classroom that used an intelligent tutoring system (Doctoral Dissertation). Retrieved from http:/
    /faculty.washington.edu/rvanderp/DLData/FlippingClassDis.pdf ETD Center 1189523914.
Strobel, J., & van Barneveld, A. (2009). When is PBL more effective? A meta-analysis of meta-analyses
    comparing PBL to conventional classrooms. The Interdisciplinary Journal of Problem-Based Learning, 3(1), 44–58.
The eLearning Guild. (2002). The e-learning development time ratio survey. Retrieved from http://www.elearning
    guild.com/pdf/1/time%20to%20develop%20Survey.pdf.
Tripp, S.D., & Bichelmeyer, B. (1990). Rapid prototyping: An alternative instructional design strategy.
    Educational Technology Research and Development, 38(1), 31–44.
van Merriënboer, J.J.G. (1997). Training complex cognitive skills: A four-component instructional design model for technical
    training. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Educational Technology Publications.
van Merriënboer, J.J.G., & Kirschner, P.A. (2007). Ten steps to complex learning. New York, NY: Taylor & Francis.
van Merrienboer, J.J.G., & Kirschner, P.A. (2013). Ten steps to complex learning (2nd ed.). New York, NY: Taylor
    & Francis.
Vernon, D.T, & Blake, R.L. (1993). Does problem-based learning work? A meta-analysis of evaluative research.
    Academic Medicine, 68(7), 550–563.
5      Top-Level Analysis, Design,
       and Evaluation




Overview
When an instructional needs assessment has indicated a need for some form of instruction
and the necessary definition of the ID project has been done (see Chapter 2), it is time to
enter the design phase, which goes through three stages: top level, mid level, and lower
level. This chapter provides detailed guidance for top-level analysis, design, and evaluation
(ADE) for both task and topic expertise.
    Top-level instructional design aims to create a “fuzzy vision” of the instruction, includ-
ing big-picture content, sequencing, and instructional methods for your instruction, offering
greater opportunity for creativity and coherence in the instruction. The purpose of the top-
level analysis is to begin to determine what to teach (given the instructional goals identified
in the needs assessment) and how to teach it (big-picture instructional methods). It identi-
fies the general content and structure for the instruction and allows you to create a fuzzy
vision of what the instruction should be like. A top-level analysis is not required if the major
parts and structure of the content have already been identified (e.g., if your project is focused
on developing a part of a larger instructional system). Table 5.1 shows the major activities
involved in the top-level ADE process, including relevant formative evaluation activities.
    As we said in Chapter 1, designing instruction is often like complex problem solv-
ing. There are many factors to consider. Suppose that you are designing training to teach
employees how to use a new tool. There are many ways to teach how to use a tool, includ-
ing a job aid, a lecture, a video demonstration, an eLearning course with interactive anima-
tions, demonstrations, or practice using virtual reality or augmented reality, and classroom
training involving expert demonstrations and hands-on practice opportunities, to name
just a few. What is the best way to teach the new tool?
    It depends. If the new tool is very simple and easy to use, a job aid might be enough.
You must consider your target learners’ skills and readiness, for the tool could be easy to
use for some people but complex and confusing for others. The learners may already have
some of the skills for using the tool. Also, if your target learners have negative attitudes or
biases toward the new tool for some reason, you should help them understand why they
need to use the tool and how it can be beneficial for their work. There are many factors
like these that call for very different instructional designs.
    The budget for the ID process and the resources for the instruction are critical factors
affecting design decisions in most, if not all, design situations. With very limited budget
and resources, for example, you won’t be able to design and develop a highly interactive
e-learning course, even if one is desired. However, interactive e-learning could be cost
effective if your training is targeted for a large number of learners who are globally distrib-
uted. Other factors to consider may include the cost and availability of the new tool for use
in instruction, instructional resources and staff available, and timeline.
                                                                                    Top-Level ADE 73

Table 5.1 Top-Level ADE Processes for Task and Topic Expertise

Task Expertise                                       Topic Expertise
1. Select and sequence big-picture task expertise 1. Select and sequence big-picture topic expertise
  1A.1. Analyze each job to identify its duties         1B.1. Analyze each domain to identify its subjects
  1A.2. Analyze each duty to identify its tasks         1B.2. Analyze each subject to identify its topics
  1A.3. Design a sequence of duties and tasks           1B.3. Design a sequence of domains and topics
                 2. Plan big-picture instructional methods
                    • Make decisions about such things as mastery, learner-centered instruction, pacing,
                      delivery methods and media selection, and templates or course management systems
                 3. Formatively evaluate, revise, and document the top-level design
                    • Formatively evaluate the big-picture content and design decisions
                    • Make warranted revisions
                    • Document the results



  To help you understand and apply the guidance offered in the rest of this book, we
provide many examples for different types of topic expertise and different types of task
expertise. This allows the reader to perceive the applicability of the instructional design
approach and its general principles across different areas of academic subject matter
and different professional and job contexts. At the same time, it allows the reader to
compare and contrast how these general principles lead to specific design decisions
and instructional procedures adapted to the specific needs and characteristics of each
project.

1. Select and Sequence Big-Picture Content
Guidance for this activity is different for task expertise than for topic expertise. The dif-
ferences are explained in the following two subsections of this chapter and are illustrated
by examples taken from past instructional design projects. In most courses, both task and
topic expertise are involved, but you should select one as the primary focus, even if both
seem equally important. If in doubt, we recommend going with task expertise for the over-
all organization of the course.

1A. Select and Sequence Big-Picture Task Expertise
Task expertise exists on a scope continuum from very narrow expertise to very broad or
comprehensive expertise. It also can be described on a description continuum from very
precise (detailed description) to very vague (general description).
   On the scope continuum, we use the term “job” to refer to the broadest scope. A job
is made up of “duties,” which in turn are made up of “tasks,” each of which typically has
several “versions” that are done differently (see Figure 5.1), and both tasks and versions
have “subtasks.” Please understand that these are relative terms, and what one person
considers a “duty,” another might consider a “task,” and so forth. However, the difference
between a version of a task and a subtask is clear. A version of a task is one way of doing the
real-world task from beginning to end. In contrast, a subtask is a part of a task and is not
performed in the real world without other parts. This distinction will become clearer in the
guidance that follows. Your ID project may only require teaching a single duty or even a
74 Top-Level ADE



                    Job

                   Duty


                   Task

                  Version


Figure 5.1 Levels of Content for Task Expertise.

single task, in which case you would need to do little or no top-level task analysis, but you
may still need other parts of the top-level ADE process.
   On the description continuum, task expertise is typically described more precisely by
either providing greater detail – breaking it down into parts (e.g., subtasks) or describing
alternative versions, or both.

1A.1. Analyze Each Job to Identify Its Duties
In the rare case that the task expertise to be taught is of very broad scope (a whole job or
even more than one job), you begin by analyzing each job (typically called a job analysis) to
identify its duties. (Otherwise, skip this step.) This is usually done by interviewing several
experts in the job. Don’t be surprised to find different perspectives about the duties from
different experts (see Table 5.2 for an example).

1A.2. Analyze Each Duty to Identify Its Tasks
If the task expertise to be taught encompasses one or more duties, you analyze each duty
to identify and list the tasks that make it up. (Otherwise, skip to Step 2 to plan big-picture
instructional methods.) If two tasks are typically conducted together, they are usually con-
sidered subtasks of a larger task. At this point, just list tasks (that are not typically con-
ducted together). Be comprehensive in scope but general in description (level of detail).
Subtasks will be identified in the lower-level analysis (Chapter 7) as either steps or heuris-
tics. To help distinguish between jobs, duties, and tasks, see Table 5.3. Be sure to list all the
tasks that should be taught in each duty.
    For the quantitative approach to rapid prototyping (described in Chapter 4), conduct the
job analysis for only one job now, and proceed to analyze it on the mid level. For the qualita-
tive approach, conduct a top-level analysis for all jobs addressed in the project before moving

Table 5.2 Example of Two Perspectives on Duties for the Job “Elementary School Math Teacher”

Teacher-Centered Perspective on Duties             Learner-Centered Perspective on Duties
Decide on a curriculum sequence for math           Decide on a curriculum sequence for math
Choose or create instructional resources           Choose or develop authentic projects
Teach whole-class lessons                          Form teams and initiate projects
Prepare tests                                      Provide just-in-time scaffolding
Grade tests                                        Monitor and coach learner teams
Report grades                                      Report skills and concepts mastered
                                                                                          Top-Level ADE 75

Table 5.3 Example of Job, Duty, and Tasks for Elementary School Math Teacher

Level of Analysis    Example of Content
Job                  Teach elementary school mathematics (learner-centered perspective)
Duty                 Form teams and initiate projects
Task                 Choose members of each team
Task                 Introduce a project to the teams
Task                 Help each team organize and set its norms


on to the mid-level analysis, to give you a broad sense of how the different jobs, duties, and
tasks relate to each other, if at all. (However, most ID projects address only one job, or
even just one or two duties in a job, because they are associated with a specific knowledge
or performance gap.) Later, this qualitative approach (described in Chapter 4) would likely
develop mock-ups of expensive media for product evaluation and revision, before devel-
oping the full-blown expensive media products. For the combination approach, conduct
the job analysis for only one job now and proceed to analyze it on the mid level.
1A.3. Design a Sequence of Duties and Tasks
Having identified the duties and their tasks, you should design a sequence for teach-
ing them. Do this by identifying any factors among the duties and their tasks that may
make it advantageous to teach one before another. For example, when there is overlap
of skills in two tasks, and one of the tasks is simpler or easier to learn than the other,
then sequence the simpler/easier one first. For another example, the order in which
the duties and/or tasks are performed may be a helpful order for teaching them. Your
big-picture sequence design will either be a linear sequence of tasks, or a branching
sequence that offers each learner control over the sequence within the constraints
of the branches (such as in digital instruction). The example in Table 5.4 shows a

Table 5.4 Example of a Sequence Design for Duties and Tasks to Be Taught to Elementary School Math Teachers

Sequence of Duties                        Sequence of Tasks
1. Decide on a curriculum sequence 1.1 Decide what math content to teach (facts, skills, and understandings)
   for math (assuming that’s possible 1.2 Identify contingency relationships (prerequisite and facilitative
   in one’s school)                       relationships)
                                      1.3 Decide whether to have a single sequence or allow sequencing
                                          options, and design the sequence(s)
2. Choose authentic projects              2.1 Decide on project specifications
                                          2.2 Search project databases for projects that meet those
                                              specifications, and choose the best ones for your learners
3. Form teams and initiate projects       3.1 Choose members of each team
                                          3.2 Introduce a project to the team(s)
                                          3.3 Help each team organize and set its norms
4. Provide just-in-time scaffolding       4.1 Monitor learner teams
                                          4.2 Provide learners with just-in-time instruction as needed
                                          4.3 Provide each team with tips, resources, and/or other support
                                              needed just in time
5. Report skills and concepts             5.1 Enter information into an online database
   mastered                               5.2 Post evidence of mastery to the student’s electronic portfolio
                                              and link it to the mastery information in the database
76 Top-Level ADE
procedural sequence1 for teaching the duties and their tasks in the job of elementary
school math teacher.
   Once the basic sequence has been determined, chunk (combine) the tasks comprising
that sequence into units of appropriate size for your instructional situation (e.g., online or
face to face). Appropriate size is typically determined by the number of hours of learning
time required. Typical terms for these units are course (for a large chunk) and module (for
a smaller chunk, typically about ten hours of learning time). While those terms are not
appropriate for all instructional systems, we use them out of convenience and familiarity,
but please understand that you may find other terms more appropriate for your instruc-
tional situation. In most cases, other individuals should be consulted about the sequence
and chunks, such as task experts or others your client may recommend. You may need to
make adjustments in the size or composition of those chunks later, when you have more
information about how long each chunk will take to master. But keep in mind that, if tasks
are small, you may want to include two or more of them in one chunk.
   Finally, be sure to enter all the results of this step in a top-level ADE document, such
as the sample template shown in Table 5.5.2 Also, you could conduct formative evaluation
(described in Step 3) on the results of this step now, but it is usually better to wait until you
have finished Step 2 (Plan Big-Picture Instructional Methods), so that you can evaluate
content and methods at the same time.

1B. Select and Sequence Big-Picture Topic Expertise
To initiate the design of your instruction, you should make very general decisions about
what to teach and how to teach it. Like task expertise, topic expertise exists on a scope
continuum from very narrow expertise to very broad or comprehensive expertise. It also
can be described on a description continuum from very detailed to very general or vague.
   On the scope continuum, we use the term “domain” to refer to the broadest scope.
A domain is made up of “subjects,” which are made up of “topics,” which can be further
analyzed to ever more narrow levels (see Table 5.6 for examples). Please understand that
these are relative terms, and what one person considers a “subject,” another might con-
sider a “topic,” and so forth. Your ID project may only require teaching a single subject or
even a single topic, in which case you would need to do little or no top-level topic analysis,
but you may still need other parts of the top-level ADE process.
   The description continuum is the same for topic expertise as for task expertise (as
explained earlier in this chapter).

1B.1. Analyze Each Domain to Identify Its Subjects
In the rare case that the topic expertise to be taught is of very broad scope, you begin by
analyzing each domain to identify all its subjects. (Otherwise, skip this step.) This is usually
done by consulting expert resources and interviewing several experts in the domain. Don’t
be surprised to find different perspectives about the subjects from different experts. Try
to get them to reach consensus. At this point, just list the subjects.

1B.2. Analyze Each Subject to Identify Its Topics
If the topic expertise to be taught encompasses one or more subjects, you analyze each
subject to identify and list the topics that make it up, again by interviewing several domain

1   A procedural sequence entails teaching the steps of a procedure in the same order as they are performed in a real-world task.
2   All templates that appear in this book (such as Tables 5.5 and 5.8) are available as MS Word downloads at
    www.reigeluth.net/holistic-4d.
                                                                          Top-Level ADE 77
experts and trying to reach consensus. (Otherwise, skip to Step 2: Plan Big-Picture
Instructional Methods). At this point, just list the topics. To help distinguish between
domains, subjects, and topics, see Table 5.6. Be sure to list all the subjects and topics that
should be taught in each domain, but don’t identify subtopics yet. Be comprehensive in
scope but general in description (level of detail). A rule of thumb is that a domain should
only have about five to ten subjects, and a subject should only have about five to ten top-
ics, but of course there are many exceptions to this rule.
   For the quantitative approach to rapid prototyping (described in Chapter 4), ana-
lyze only one topic now, and proceed to analyze it on the mid level. For the qualitative


Table 5.5 Template for a Top-Level ADE Document for Task Expertise
78 Top-Level ADE


Table 5.6 Examples of Domains, Subjects, and Topics

Level of Analysis      Example 1                               Example 2
Domain                 Learning theory                         Economics
Subjects               Behaviorism (see topics below)          Microeconomics (see topics below)
                       Cognitivism                             Macroeconomics
                       Constructivism                          International economics
                                                               Development economics
Topics                 (For behaviorism)                       (For microeconomics)
                       Classical conditioning theory           Supply and demand
                       Reinforcement theory                    Markets
                                                               Production, cost, and efficiency
                                                               Specialization
                                                               Firms


approach, conduct a top-level analysis for all topics addressed in the project before mov-
ing on to the mid-level analysis. Later, this qualitative approach would likely entail develop-
ing mock-ups of expensive media for product evaluation and revision, before developing
the full-blown expensive media products. For the combination approach, conduct the
domain analysis for only one domain now and proceed to analyze it on the mid level.
1B.3. Design a Sequence for the Subjects and Topics
Having identified the subjects and their topics, you should design a sequence for teach-
ing them. Do this by identifying any factors among the subjects/topics that may make it
advantageous to teach one before another. For example, one topic may build on under-
standings learned in another topic. Also, when there is overlap of concepts or principles
in two topics, and one of the topics is easier to learn than the other, then sequence the
easier one first. Often, the historical order in which the knowledge (subjects and top-
ics) was developed is a good indicator of an easy-to-difficult sequence (see Table 5.7). In
some cases, it doesn’t matter which you teach first. In such cases, it is usually beneficial to
allow learners to select their own sequence when possible (such as in online instruction).
In such a case, your big-picture sequence design will be a branching sequence that offers
each learner control over the sequence within the constraints of the branches, rather than
a linear sequence of topics.


Table 5.7 Example of a Sequence Design for Subjects and Topics for the Domain “Learning Theory”

Sequence of Subjects     Sequence of Topics
1. Behaviorism           1.1   Classical conditioning theory
                         1.2   Reinforcement theory
2. Cognitivism           2.1   Information processing theory
                         2.2   Schema theory
                         2.3   Social cognitive theory
3. Constructivism        3.1   Cognitive constructivism
                         3.2   Social constructivism
                         3.3   Constructionism
                                                                         Top-Level ADE 79
   Once the basic sequence has been determined, chunk (combine) the subjects and top-
ics comprising that sequence into units of appropriate size for your instructional situation
(e.g., online or face to face). Appropriate size is typically determined by the number of
hours of learning time required. Typical terms for these units are course (for a large chunk)
and module (for a smaller chunk, typically about ten hours of learning time). While those
terms are not appropriate for all instructional systems, we use them out of convenience
and familiarity, but please understand that you may find other terms more appropriate for
your instructional situation. In most cases, other individuals should be consulted about
the sequence and chunks, such as task experts or others your client may recommend. You
may need to make adjustments in the size or composition of those chunks later, when you
have more information about how long each chunk will take to master. But keep in mind
that, if subjects or topics are small, you may want to include two or more of them in one
chunk. You may need to make adjustments in those chunks later, when you have more
information about how long each chunk will take to master.
   Note that the chunking may vary depending on the level of learning. For example, in a
doctoral program, you might choose a large chunk (equivalent to a course) for each subject
– one on behaviorism, one on cognitivism, and one on constructivism. Conversely, for a
high school curriculum, you might have learning theory as a smaller chunk within a large
chunk on psychology.
   Finally, be sure to enter all the results of this step in a top-level ADE document, such
as the sample template shown in Table 5.8. Also, you could conduct formative evaluation
(described in Step 3) on the results of this step now, but it is usually better to wait until
you have finished Step 2 so that you can evaluate content and methods at the same time.

2. Plan Big-Picture Instructional Methods
Begin this planning with an analysis of very general information about the target learners:

•   How many people are to be taught?
•   How geographically dispersed are they?
•   What time and timing constraints are they under?
•   Can they get together in groups? If so, how large could the groups be?
•   Are there limitations regarding such things as age, reading level, and technology skills?

This analysis includes elements of all three kinds of contextual analysis described by
Tessmer and Richey (1997) – analysis of the orienting, instructional, and transfer contexts.
It provides information to help you plan the big-picture instructional methods, which are
a fuzzy vision of the instruction. They include answers to general questions like:

•   Will you allow your target learners to move forward only when each has mastered the
    content – and as soon as each has mastered it?
•   Will you use the learner-centered approach, and if so, which form(s) of learning by
    doing will you use?
•   Which pacing strategy will you use?
•   Which delivery method and media will you use under your media constraints?
•   Will you use a course management system or an existing template for your training?

We offer guidance for these big-picture methods: mastery, pacing, learning by doing, deliv-
ery methods and media, and selection of templates and/or course management systems.
The guidance for these methods is the same for both Task and Topic expertise.
80 Top-Level ADE


Table 5.8 Template for a Top-Level ADE Document for Topic Expertise




Mastery
Typically, education has been done “with time as the constant” (learner progress is based
on a fixed, allotted amount of time) and amount of learning as the variable (as indicated by
grades on tests). This does not promote high levels of performance. Therefore, whenever
possible, you should design instruction in which learning is the constant and amount of
                                                                                   Top-Level ADE 81
time is variable – a mastery approach or competency or proficiency approach to education or
training – whereby learners move forward only when they have mastered the content (and
as soon as they have mastered the content), rather than when a predetermined amount
of time has passed (Block, 1971; Bloom, 1968, 1984; Kulik, Kulik, & Bangert-Drowns,
1990). Given that different people learn at different rates, the mastery approach means
you should either customize the pace of instruction, or you should allow faster learners
to spend less time on the instruction and more time on other important matters. Online
learning is ideally suited to customized pace and mastery learning.

Learner-Centered or Teacher-Centered Instruction
Whether or not you go with mastery-based instruction and self-pacing, decide whether or
not to use learner-centered instruction, which includes learning by doing (see Chapter 4), self-
pacing, and at least some elements of self-directed learning (Albanese & Mitchell, 1993;
Barrows, 1986; Barrows & Tamblyn, 1980; Jonassen, 2011; Kirschner, Sweller, & Clark,
2006; Reigeluth, 2012; Reigeluth & Karnopp, 2013; Savery, 2009). The major alternative is
teacher-centered instruction, which includes lecture, discussion, tutorial instruction, and others
(with or without multimedia) and either group lockstep or group pacing with little or no
self-direction. Of course, any of these teacher-centered approaches can be used to provide
just-in-time instructional support within the learner-centered approach. This is a time to
be creative. Especially if the learners are not likely to be well motivated to learn a topic,
think of whether you might be able to organize the instruction around projects of interest
to learners, possibly in the form of a game.

Pacing
Pacing is the rate at which learners go through the instructional sequence. Table 5.9 pre-
sents several ways to pace the learners’ progress.


Table 5.9 Pacing Strategies

Strategy         Description
Group        The group moves through the instructional sequence at a predetermined pace, completing
  Lockstep      the instructional sequence on schedule. Normally, this is the least effective form of
                pacing, because slower learners may not be able to master the material and faster
                learners waste time waiting for the group to move on. However, it is often used when
                there are constraints, such as equipment or facilities that require the learners to flow
                through the sequence on a schedule to avoid conflicts.
Group Pacing The group moves through the instructional sequence as a group, at the same rate, but
                the group may move faster or slower than the predetermined pace depending on the
                ability and needs of the group as a whole. This is a very easy-to-use method in teacher-
                centered instruction, but slower learners often are unable to master the material at the
                group pace, and faster learners miss the opportunity to move on more quickly.
Self-Paced   Learners are allowed to work at their own pace – or their team’s pace – through the
                instructional sequence within certain parameters. This form of pacing is very effective
                for ensuring mastery by all learners.
Combination Any of the above-mentioned forms of pacing may be used in combination in a course.
   Pacing       Some of the instruction may be group-paced while other instruction may be self-paced.
82 Top-Level ADE
Delivery Methods and Media
How will the instruction be delivered to the target learners and where? In this book we use
“delivery methods” to refer to big-picture selection of sets of media, such as:

•   Online learning (synchronous and/or asynchronous)
•   Mobile learning
•   Face-to-face instruction
•   Blended instruction (both face-to-face and online)

As Piskurich (2015) noted, there is no rule that says you should choose only one delivery
method. In fact, many successful instructional programs combine different delivery meth-
ods. Learners tend to like some variation (though not too much). One of the most common
examples of blending delivery methods is the integration of classroom and online learning,
which is often called blended learning or hybrid learning. Blended learning (Horn & Staker,
2015) takes advantage of the strengths of both face-to-face interaction and online learn-
ing. There are many ways to blend delivery methods. They include, but are not limited to:
•   Classroom and online learning
•   Classroom and on-the-job learning
•   Classroom learning and job aids
•   Synchronous e-learning and asynchronous e-learning
•   Self-paced e-learning and job aids
•   Any combination of the above

In addition, there are many media options for these delivery methods. Each option has
its own advantages and disadvantages. After you make a tentative decision about delivery
method, you should do some preliminary thinking about media to use with it. Medium
is defined in this book as any means by which instruction is implemented with a learner,
including humans and real-world objects, as well as different kinds of technology and
other materials, to foster learning. In addition to gaining a general understanding of the
content and instruction (from Steps 1 and 2), it helps to identify any major constraints on
media selection now, because they will likely influence your subsequent design decisions.
For this process of selection by rejection, there are several kinds of constraints to consider
(Romiszowski, 1988), including:

•   Are there some media that you cannot afford? This is a constraint of the funds avail-
    able for your ID project. Conversely, are there some media that are available, includ-
    ing ones that your client really wants you to utilize?
•   Are there some media that are not cost-effective, given the size of your target audi-
    ence? For example, if you will have a very large number of learners, the extra expense
    of designing digital media will be more cost-effective in the long run, regardless of
    what you can afford with your current budget. It would be wise to procure additional
    funding to end up costing less in the long run.
•   Are there some media that are not administratively feasible? There may not be suf-
    ficient classroom space for large numbers of learners. Or there may not be enough
    equipment for learners to work with, such as in hands-on training with heating, venti-
    lation, and air conditioning system (HVAC) repairs.
•   Are there some media that are not practically feasible for learners and/or teachers?
    For example, learners may not have virtual reality headsets, or teachers may not be
    comfortable or capable of using certain technology systems.
                                                                             Top-Level ADE 83
Based on your constraints, you should initially narrow down your media options (selection
by rejection) so you can keep them in mind for your mid-level design. Different media will
likely be appropriate for different learning needs, so selection of specific media should
take place on the mid and lower levels of design. However, it is helpful to counterbalance
selection by rejection by also imagining what media might be ideal – selection by optimiza-
tion (Romiszowski, 1988). As mentioned in Chapter 4, you should consider what might
be ideal:

•   for the content (given the affordances needed – e.g., based on the nature of the per-
    formance, tools needed, and so forth),
•   for the instructional methods (given the affordances needed – e.g., interaction, discus-
    sion, motion, color, and such),
•   for the learners (given any special characteristics – e.g., poor reading skills, physical
    disabilities, and so forth), and
•   for the teachers (given their media skills, media preferences, teaching logistics, and such).

Of course, at this point what might be “ideal” is largely conjecture based on your experi-
ence and intuition. This is a time to be creative! But keep in mind that you will have oppor-
tunities on Levels 2 and 3 to refine, elaborate, and otherwise change your initial selections.

Templates and Course Management Systems
Determine whether you are required to use, or want to use, a template or pattern for your
instruction. Also decide whether the instruction will be delivered on an existing platform
(course management or learning management system). If so, note the limitations of the tem-
plate and/or platform, for they will influence the instructional methods that can be used.

3. Formatively Evaluate, Revise, and Document the Top-Level Design
This is the last major activity at the top level. Irrespective of whether you are dealing with
task or topic expertise, you should:

•   Formatively evaluate the big-picture content and design decisions with content experts
    and instructors who are experienced in teaching the content to the target learners, and
    make warranted revisions (see Chapter 10, Formative Evaluation, for guidance)
•   Document the results in the form of a top-level ADE document
•   Revise your project management plan

Formative Evaluation and Revision
Instructional solutions which at first appear to be ideal may prove to be inadequate, inap-
propriate, or just impossible, for a variety of reasons that may spring from a variety of issues:

•   Contextual issues (e.g., rejection by teachers, parental opposition, lack of management
    support)
•   Resource issues (e.g., lack of adequate funding, time for development, or ID staff)
•   Implementation/usability issues (e.g., lack of necessary study skills, learning time, or
    other necessary resources on the part of the target learners)
•   Distribution/dissemination issues (e.g., inability of the target learners to access and
    use the instructional system, such as not all the target learners having Internet access)
84 Top-Level ADE
This list is just a sample of the many sources of potential problems or difficulties that an ID
project may encounter. A useful tool for identifying such issues is the SWOT (Strengths –
Weaknesses – Opportunities – Threats) methodology of analysis (Helms & Nixon, 2010;
Jackson, Joshi, & Erhardt, 2003). Another useful tool, based on systems-thinking, is the
CIPP (Context – Input – Process – Product) methodology for troubleshooting issues in
complex systems (Stufflebeam, 2003; Stufflebeam & Zhang, 2017). This can be used both
for evaluating problems in existing systems and for initial diagnosis to predict potential
sources of problems.
   Your formative evaluation cannot involve tryouts with learners yet because the design
decisions are too general, so among the options described in Chapter 10, you should con-
duct an expert review with content experts and, especially for large projects, instruc-
tional experts by means of a walk-through exercise to enhance appropriateness, accuracy,
effectiveness, and appeal. It is usually beneficial to choose experts who have experience
teaching your content to your target learners, for they tend to have both kinds of expertise.
Also, get input from the experts on what changes they think would likely improve the con-
tent and design, and either make revisions during the walk-through exercise, or as soon as
possible after it. Please see Chapter 10 for guidance on expert review.

Top-Level ADE Document
Your top-level ADE document should be prepared as you proceed through Steps 1 and 2 of
the top-level ADE process and revised as soon as possible during or after your formative
evaluation and revisions. As already explained in Chapter 4, a design document is a “blue-
print” or written description of the instructional system. Tables 5.5 and 5.8 present templates
for top-level ADE documents for task expertise and topic expertise, respectively. We encour-
age you to improve on these templates according to your particular needs and working styles.

Project Management Plan
Perhaps one of the most important activities during your top-level ADE process is to see
how others have addressed similar instructional needs. There is no benefit to be gained
from “reinventing the wheel” if there already exists a wheel that works well. But even if
an existing design is not perfect in all respects, it is often much more cost-effective to
redesign (adapt) what exists than to start from scratch. The time to review and evaluate
existing designs is early in the design process – during the top-level phase of ADE. With
a “fuzzy” idea of how best to design the needed instruction, you can review instruction
previously developed for the same or similar instructional needs and adopt, adapt, or reject
what is available before embarking on a totally fresh (and more expensive) ID endeavor.
Consequently, you should revise your project management plan (developed with guidance
in Chapter 2) based on any appropriate instruction you have found.

Where Are We?
You have previously completed the Define activities in which your instructional needs analy-
sis revealed a need for some form of instruction and your project planning created the foun-
dation for the rest of your ID project (Chapter 2). This chapter has offered guidance for
conducting a top-level ADE for both task and topic expertise, based on the major considera-
tions described in Chapters 3 and 4. This guidance should result in a top-level ADE docu-
ment similar to the ones shown in Tables 5.5 and 5.8, which include selection and sequencing
of the major “chunks” of the content and the selection of big-picture instructional methods.
                                                                                      Top-Level ADE 85

Table 5.10 ADE Process for Task Expertise and Topic Expertise (Differences Are in Bold)

              Task Expertise                                  Topic Expertise
Top-Level     1. Select and sequence big-picture content      1. Select and sequence big-picture content
  Ch. 5       2. Plan big-picture instructional methods       2. Plan big-picture instructional methods
              3. Formatively evaluate and document the        3. Formatively evaluate and document the
                 top-level design                                top-level design
Mid-Level     1. Identify and sequence versions of each       1. Identify and sequence applications of
  Ch. 6          task                                            each topic
              2. Identify variations within each version      2. Identify variations within each
                 and create designer objectives                  application and create designer objectives
              3. Formatively evaluate the findings            3. Formatively evaluate the findings
              4. Develop the learner objectives for each      4. Develop the learner objectives for each
                 version                                         topic
              5. Design learner assessments for each          5. Design learner assessments for each
                 version                                         topic
              6. Design the ways that learning-by-doing       6. Design the ways that learning-by-doing
                 will be accomplished for each version           will be accomplished for each topic
              7. Select media in general for the version      7. Select media in general for the application
              8. Formatively evaluate and document the        8. Formatively evaluate and document the
                 results                                         results
Lower-        1. Select and sequence the organizing           1. Select and sequence the organizing
  Level          content for each version of the task            content for each topic
  Ch. 7       2. Select and classify the supporting content 2. Select and classify the supporting content
                 for each version                                for each topic
              3. Sequence the supporting content for each 3. Sequence the supporting content for each
                 version                                         topic
              4. Evaluate and document the findings           4. Evaluate and document the findings
              5. Identify resource requirements,              5. Identify resource requirements,
                 availability, and existing instruction for      availability, and existing instruction for
                 each version                                    each topic
              6. Revise and elaborate the instruction and     6. Revise and elaborate the instruction and
                 assessments for each version                    assessments for each topic
              7. Formatively evaluate the ADE document 7. Formatively evaluate the ADE document
              8. Begin developing the implementation          8. Begin developing the implementation
                 plan, and update the project management         plan, and update the project management
                 plan                                            plan
   Ch. 8      Detailed guidance is provided for Lower-Level Step 6: Revise and elaborate the instruction
              and assessments for each version/topic. It includes instructional strategies for:
                 • Remember information
                 • Understand relationships
                 • Apply skills and higher-order skills
                 • Act on attitudes or values



    Now it is time to add some more detail to this fuzzy vision of your new instructional
system. The next chapter (Chapter 6) provides guidance for conducting a mid-level ADE
for both task and topic expertise, again based on the major considerations described ear-
lier. Chapters 7 and 8 complete the ADE process with guidance for lower-level ADE.
Finally, Develop and Deploy are addressed in Chapters 9–12. The whole ID process is
again summarized in Table 5.10.
86 Top-Level ADE
Exercises
Here again we offer suggestions for a professor using this book as a textbook in a course,
to help the students understand more deeply the contents of this chapter. We suggest that
you keep the same teams of about three students each to continue to work on their ID
projects throughout the course. However, these exercises can be done individually by any
reader who wants to deepen their understanding and skills.

 1. Have each team prepare a top-level ADE document for their project. Given the
    intentionally narrow scope of each project, this will likely be a very small ADE docu-
    ment. For what you consider to be the best ADE documents, we suggest you get
    written permission from the students to use them as examples in the next offering of
    your course.
 2. Have each team offer suggestions for improvement of the ADE document of one or
    two other teams before you review and provide feedback to the students.
 3. Have a whole-class, synchronous discussion of the pros and cons of a top-level ADE
    process, including any difficulties or challenges they faced during the process and
    what changes to the process might have helped. You can also have them discuss when
    top-level ADE is critical or unnecessary. We would love to get your suggestions for
    improvement.

References
Albanese, M.A., & Mitchell, S. (1993). Problem-based learning: A review of literature on its outcomes and
   implementation issues. Academic Medicine, 68(1), 52–79.
Barrows, H.S. (1986). A taxonomy of problem-based learning methods. Medical Education, 20(6), 481–486.
   doi:10.1111/j.1365-2923.1986.tb01386.x.
Barrows, H.S., & Tamblyn, R.M. (1980). Problem-based learning: An approach to medical education. New York, NY:
   Springer.
Block, J.H. (1971). Mastery learning: Theory and practice. New York, NY: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, Inc.
Bloom, B.S. (1968). Learning for mastery. Evaluation Comment, 1(1), 1–12.
Bloom, B.S. (1984). The 2 sigma problem: The search for methods of group instruction as effective as one-to-
   one tutoring. Educational Researcher, 13(6), 4–16.
Helms, M.M., & Nixon, J. (2010). Exploring SWOT analysis – where are we now? A review of academic
   research from the last decade. Journal of Strategy and Management, 3(3), 215–251.
Horn, M.B., & Staker, H. (2015). Blended: Using disruptive innovation to improve schools. San Francisco, CA:
   Jossey-Bass.
Jackson, S.E., Joshi, A., & Erhardt, N.L. (2003). Recent research on team and organizational diversity: SWOT
   analysis and implications. Journal of Management, 29(6), 801–830.
Jonassen, D.H. (2011). Learning to solve problems: A handbook for designing problem-solving learning environments. New
   York, NY: Routledge.
Kirschner, P.A., Sweller, J., & Clark, R.E. (2006). Why minimal guidance during instruction does not work: An
   analysis of the failure of constructivist, discovery, problem-based, experiential, and inquiry-based teaching.
   Educational Psychologist, 41(2), 75–86.
Kulik, C.-L. C., Kulik, J.A., & Bangert-Drowns, R.L. (1990). Effectiveness of mastery learning programs: A
   meta-analysis. Review of Educational Research, 60(2), 265–299. doi:10.3102/00346543060002265.
Piskurich, G.M. (2015). Rapid instructional design: Learning ID fast and right (3rd ed.). Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley
   & Sons, Inc.
Reigeluth, C.M. (2012). Instructional theory and technology for a post-industrial world. In R.A. Reiser &
   J.V. Dempsey (Eds.), Trends and issues in instructional design and technology (3rd ed., pp. 75–83). Boston, MA:
   Pearson Education.
                                                                                                  Top-Level ADE 87
Reigeluth, C.M., & Karnopp, J.R. (2013). Reinventing schools: It’s time to break the mold. Lanham, MD: Rowman &
   Littlefield Publishing Group.
Romiszowski, A.J. (1988). The selection and use of instructional media: For improved classroom teaching and for interactive,
   individualized instruction (2nd ed.). New York, NY: Nichols Publishing.
Savery, J.R. (2009). Problem-based approach to instruction. In C.M. Reigeluth & A.A. Carr-Chellman (Eds.),
   Instructional-design theories and models: Building a common knowledge base, (Vol. III, pp. 143–165). New York, NY:
   Routledge.
Stufflebeam, D.L. (2003). The CIPP model for evaluation. In D.L. Stufflebeam & T. Kellaghan (Eds.),
   International handbook of educational evaluation (pp. 31–62). Berlin: Springer.
Stufflebeam, D.L., & Zhang, G. (2017). The CIPP evaluation model: How to evaluate for improvement and accountability.
   New York, NY: Guilford Publications.
Tessmer, M., & Richey, R. C. (1997). The role of context in learning and instructional design. Educational
   Technology Research and Development, 45(2), 85–115.
6      Mid-Level Analysis, Design,
       and Evaluation




Overview
Having identified the big picture about what to teach and how to teach it in your top-level
analysis, design, and evaluation (ADE) process (Chapter 5), you have a more creative and
meaningful context within which to gather more detailed information about what to teach
and how to teach it for each task and/or topic listed. Mid-level analysis and design aims to
provide the next level of clarity about the vision for each task or topic, including not only a
more detailed selection of content and its sequence, but also objectives, assessments, and
instructional methods.
   Table 6.1 presents a summary of the steps involved in performing the second level
of the ADE process. Once more, we note that, although the same steps are performed
in both cases (task expertise and topic expertise), there are certain differences in the way
some of them should be performed for each. The points of difference are identified in the
table and are explained in the following sections of this chapter.
   Keep in mind that mid-level ADE processes are not linear processes. You are
encouraged to use this model flexibly rather than trying to complete the steps in a lin-
ear manner. It may be beneficial to perform some of these steps simultaneously and/
or recursively, based on your professional judgment. You may skip the first three steps
for some small-scale ID projects. During later steps, you will likely revise the outputs
of earlier steps.
   Two terms you may not be familiar with in this table are designer objectives and learner
objectives. Objectives serve two purposes: to help instructional designers design good
instruction (herein called designer objectives) and to help learners learn (herein called
learner objectives). Each kind of objective needs different types of information to be most
useful. One kind of objective does not fit both purposes. Therefore, we offer guidance for
developing both kinds of objectives: designer and learner.
   It is also important to keep in mind that on the mid level, you are designing instruction
for each individual task or topic. Table 6.2 is a reminder of the levels of content.

1. Identify and Sequence Major Content for Each Task or Topic
This step is done differently for task and topic expertise. If your content has equal amounts
of task and topic expertise, you may design a holistic sequence separately for each kind of
content, and then merge the two sequences by adjusting each to fit well with the other. If
the content is not close to equal amounts, then view the lesser one as supporting content
that will be plugged into the sequence of the other (see guidance in Step 3.2, Adjust the
Size of the Learning Session, in Chapter 7).
                                                                                    Mid-Level ADE 89

Table 6.1 Mid-Level ADE Process for Task and Topic Expertise

A. Task Expertise                                        B. Topic Expertise
1A. Identify and sequence versions of each task          1B. Identify and sequence applications of
                                                            each topic
1A.1. Identify simplifying conditions for each task      1B.1. Identify applications of each topic
1A.2. Identify versions of each task                     1B.2. Classify each topic as primarily conceptual
                                                               or theoretical understanding
1A.3. Design a simple-to-complex or branching            1B.3. Design a tentative sequence of
      sequence of versions                                     applications
2A. Identify variations within each version, and         2B. Identify variations within each
  create designer objectives for the version                application, and create designer objectives
                                                            for the application
2A.1. List all important kinds of variations for each    2B.1. List all important kinds of variations for
      version                                                   each application
2A.2. Categorize the difficulty of each variation        2B.2. Categorize the difficulty of each variation
           3. Formatively evaluate the findings
               • Review and validate the results of Steps 1 and 2 with experts
           4. Develop learner objectives for each version or application
               • Develop demonstration objectives (or abstract objectives)
           5. Design appropriate kinds of learner assessments for the version or application
               • Criterion-referenced vs. norm-referenced assessments
               • Performance vs. predictive assessments
               • Characteristics of assessments
               • Develop assessments
6A. Design the ways learning-by-doing will be            6B. Design the ways learning-by-doing will
  accomplished for each version                             be accomplished for each application
6A.1. Decide about the project environment and           6B.1. Design a scenario for each variation of
      number of projects                                       each application
6A.2. Design the scenario for each project               6B.2. Develop details of the application for each
6A.3. Develop details of the project for each scenario         scenario
           7. Select media in general for the version or application
                • Types of media
                • Rules for media selection
           8. Formatively evaluate your designs and revise your project management plan
               • Formatively evaluate and revise your designs with experts
               • Update your project management plan


Table 6.2. Levels of Content

Task Expertise      Topic Expertise
Job                 Domain
Duty                Subject
Task                Topic


1A. For Task Expertise: Identify and Sequence Versions of Each Task
This book advocates not only a holistic approach to instructional design and task analy-
sis, but also a holistic instructional sequence. This stands in contrast to the traditional,
90 Mid-Level ADE
fragmented, hierarchical sequence pioneered by Robert Gagné. That approach advocates
breaking a complex task down into progressively simpler component skills (called pre-
requisite skills) until you reach the level of skills that learners already possess. Then the
instructional sequence works its way up from the simpler components (prerequisites)
to progressively broader and more complex components until, finally, at the end of the
instruction, the learner gets to learn and perform a complete task. This approach is in
direct conflict with schema theory’s understanding that meaningful learning is assimilated
into a mental model, which provides a meaningful context for what is being learned, and
consequently requires a holistic sequence. But prerequisites do exist. So, how can you
design a holistic sequence without ignoring the need to teach prerequisites first?
    The solution lies in recognizing that all complex tasks have different versions, which
range from relatively simple to very complex. For example, the task of driving a car (which
we are designating as a unit of instruction) has a variety of versions, including driving with
a standard versus automatic transmission, driving in heavy traffic versus no traffic, driving
in bad weather versus good weather, and much more (hill starts, parallel parking, and so
forth). So, you can begin the sequence of instruction on a task with the simplest real-world
version of the task (unless the learner has already mastered it), and restrict the prerequi-
sites to those that are relevant for that simple version (Reigeluth, 1999, 2007). Research
has shown that people learn better with such a holistic sequence (Anderson, Osborn, &
Tierney, 1984; West & Kellett, 1981; Widmayer, 2004). Furthermore, the versions of a task
represent the full range of expertise that should be taught for the task, and different ver-
sions have different content that needs to be taught, so analyzing the versions of a task is
key to deciding what to teach as well as for designing a good instructional sequence. If there
is not much variation within the task, then you may only need to teach one or two versions.

1A.1. Identify Simplifying Conditions for Each Task
Work with a task expert to identify the simplest real-world version of the task that is fairly
representative of the task as a whole. This is stated as a behavior, together with the condi-
tions that distinguish that version from all other real-world versions (called simplifying condi-
tions). Table 6.3 shows an example.
    Ask the task expert what conditions call for the task to be performed differently from
other versions of the task. (In the lower-level ADE process, the task expert will identify
the knowledge that an expert needs to perform each version of the task.)

1A.2. Identify Versions of Each Task
Work with the task expert to identify each of the progressively more complex versions of
the task up to the level of complexity required by the instructional need. This is usually
done by removing one of the simplifying conditions at a time. Table 6.4 shows an example.
Table 6.3 Example of a Simplest Real-World Version
For the task, “drive a motor vehicle,” the simplest real-world version might be “drive a small, automatic-
  transmission car in good weather with no traffic, a familiar simple route, and no need to parallel park or
  start up on a hill.”


Table 6.4 Example of More Complex Real-World Versions
In the car driving example, more complex versions include: drive on an unfamiliar complex route, drive in
   bad weather conditions, drive with parallel parking required, starting up on a hill, drive a larger vehicle,
   drive with a standard transmission and clutch, and all likely combinations of these conditions.
                                                                                       Mid-Level ADE 91
1A.3. Design a Simple-to-Complex or Branching Sequence of Versions
In general, the order in which you identified the versions of the task should be a good
simple-to-complex sequence for teaching the versions, because you identified the simpler
versions before the more complex versions (Reigeluth, 1992, 1999, 2007; Reigeluth &
Rodgers, 1980). However, versions of a complex task are seldom related linearly; they usu-
ally have branching relationships whereby several versions could be learned immediately
after a given version has been learned. Arranging versions in a branching sequence allows
more flexibility (learner control) in the instructional sequence, which is particularly ben-
eficial for online instruction, and takes little additional effort. Table 6.5 shows an example.
    The learner could be allowed to choose the sequence of those versions based on her or
his interests, or the critical or more difficult versions could be taught first, because once
mastered, the learner could be required to occasionally drive under those (previously mas-
tered) conditions while learning to handle each new condition, thereby overlearning those
critical or difficult versions.
    While you could formatively evaluate your sequence design at this point, it is usually
better to do so after you have completed Step 2 (Identify Variations and Create Designer
Objectives), because it is more efficient to evaluate the sequence at the same time as the
variations and designer objectives.
    For rapid prototyping. If you are using a quantitative approach to rapid prototyping (see
Chapter 4), you only do the above for one task, and then move on through the rest of the
ID process, including formative evaluation and revision, before coming back to repeat
the process for each additional task. Otherwise, conduct a mid-level analysis for all tasks
addressed in your ID project before moving on. In the latter case, you can still do a qualita-
tive approach to rapid prototyping.

1B. For Topic Expertise: Identify and Sequence Applications of Each Topic
The following is a description of how to conduct mid-level analysis and design for topic
expertise. You may perform some of the steps concurrently and others sequentially.
   Topics can be useful to learners in different ways. It is important to identify those dif-
ferent ways for several reasons:

•    To motivate learners by showing a topic’s usefulness
•    To aid transfer to the variety of applications of the topic that the learner may encoun-
     ter in the real world
•    To identify ways to accomplish learning by doing in the instruction (when appropriate)

1B.1. Identify Applications of Each Topic
You already designed the sequence of topics in the top-level ADE process (Chapter 5). Now,
for each topic, work with a subject-matter expert (SME) to identify the important ways it

Table 6.5 Example of a Branching Sequence of Real-World Versions
When teaching the task of driving a car, the simplest version of the task entails automatic shift, no traffic,
  good weather, easy parking, no slippery roads, small car, and no hill starts. Once that version is mastered,
  the learner could go to the version that has moderate traffic, or the version that has bad weather, or the
  version that has parallel parking between two cars, or the version that has slippery roads, and so forth.
  Those additional versions can be taught in any order.
92 Mid-Level ADE
could be used by the learners. Table 6.6 shows two examples. Look at each use critically to
determine if it is appropriate, given the educational requirements and big-picture instructional
methods. Then decide on the number of applications you will include to develop learner mas-
tery of the topic. Budgetary or time constraints may prevent you from being able to include the
number of applications that would ensure mastery across all important situations. However,
the projected costs of lack of full mastery should be weighed against such constraints. In many
cases, you should find ways to lift those constraints rather than sacrifice needed competence.
And if there is little variation among applications, you may only need one or two.

1B.2. Classify Each Topic as Primarily Conceptual or Theoretical Understanding
For each topic, work with an SME to decide if its applications primarily entail using con-
ceptual understanding, which is a matter of describing concepts (e.g., person, place, or thing)
and their kinds or parts, or theoretical understanding, which is a matter of using causal or
natural-process relationships to make predictions, give explanations, or develop solutions
to problems (see Table 6.7 for examples in biology). Theoretical understanding always
requires some conceptual understanding, but even a topic that primarily entails conceptual
understanding usually has some important theoretical understanding. The bottom line is
that you should decide which is most important. For example, a biology course might
focus on students learning the classifications of life: domains, kingdoms, phyla, classes,
orders, families, genuses, and species – which is a focus on conceptual understanding. Or
the course might focus on the five basic principles of biology: cell theory, gene theory,
evolution, homeostasis, and laws of thermodynamics, as shown in Table 6.7.
   In the rare case that the two kinds of understanding are of fairly equal importance, you
can create a sequence for each kind of content, and then adjust each to merge the two
into a single hybrid sequence (Beissner & Reigeluth, 1987). This entails looking for places
in each sequence where the concepts line up with related principles and adjusting each
sequence so that related concepts and principles line up with each other with minimal
detriment to the soundness of either sequence.

1B.3. Design a Tentative Sequence of Applications
For each topic, work with an SME to arrange its applications in an easy-to-difficult
sequence, preferably a branching sequence to allow for some learner control. This sequence
may be modified after you analyze additional (more detailed) content for the topic in the
lower-level ADE process.

Table 6.6 Examples of Applications for a Topic

Example 1                                              Example 2
The topic “supply and demand” could be used to        The topic “reinforcement theory” could be used
  make predictions, give explanations, or solve         to make predictions, give explanations, or solve
  problems related to goods, services, labor, money,    problems related to human motivation and
  or stocks. It could be used to make decisions about   behavior, or animal behavior and training. It
  when to buy and sell, who to vote for, and what       could be used to make decisions about either
  government policies to support or oppose (e.g.,       increasing or decreasing given behaviors. And it
  increase the minimum wage or not). It could be        could be used in work settings, home settings,
  used in work settings, home settings, and casual      and other personal interactions.
  conversations with people.
                                                                                    Mid-Level ADE 93

Table 6.7 Examples of Conceptual versus Theoretical Understanding in Biologya

Conceptual Understandings                                        Theoretical Understandings
Kinds of life                                                    Cell theory
• Kinds of plants (botany)                                       • Energy flow occurs within cells
  ο Kinds of trees                                               • Heredity information (DNA) is
  ο Kinds of mosses                                                passed on from cell to cell
  ο Kinds of vines
  ο …                                                            Gene theory
                                                                 • Gene transmission
• Kinds of animals (zoology)                                     • Law of segregation
  ο Kinds of mammals                                             • Law of independent assortment
  ο Kinds of fish
  ο …                                                            Evolution
                                                                 • Natural selection
• Kinds of fungi                                                 • Genetic variation
  ο Kinds of yeasts
  ο Kinds of molds                                               Homeostasis
                                                                 • Homeostatic processes (various)
  ο …
                                                                 • Thermodynamics
• Kinds of bacteria (microbiology)                               • Laws of thermodynamics in
  ο …                                                              biological systems
• Kinds of viruses (microbiology)
  ο …

a
    Based on Bailey (2019).

    While you could formatively evaluate your sequence design at this point, it is usually
better to do so after you have completed Step 2 (Identify Variations and Create Designer
Objectives), because it is more efficient to evaluate the sequence at the same time as the
variations and designer objectives.
    For rapid prototyping. In a quantitative approach to rapid prototyping (see Chapter 4,
Section 5), only do this for one topic (or even just one subtopic, depending on scope), and
move on with that one topic through formative evaluation and revision before coming
back to repeat the process for each additional topic. Otherwise, conduct a mid-level analy-
sis for all topics addressed in your ID project before moving on. In the latter case, you can
still do a qualitative approach to rapid prototyping.

2. Identify Variations and Create Designer Objectives
There are often variations in the way a version of a complex task is performed and in the
way an application of a topic can be used. It is helpful to make design decisions about
such variations now because they provide a map that will guide design decisions on the
lower level (see Chapters 7 and 8). Similarly, it is helpful to create designer objectives at
this point, for the same reason. The guidance here is different for task and topic expertise.

2A. For Task Expertise: Identify Variations within Each Version
of a Task, and Create Designer Objectives for the Version
For complex tasks (e.g., driving a motor vehicle), not only are there different versions (e.g.,
driving with an automatic versus standard gear shift), but there are also many variations in
94 Mid-Level ADE
the way a single version is performed. There may be variations in the behavior (e.g., passing
other vehicles, merging into traffic), variations in the conditions of performance (including
contextual factors, environmental factors, tools and other resources – e.g., bad weather
may be rainy, icy, windy, sun in your face), and variations in standards (e.g., arrive as quickly
as possible, drive as safely as possible, make the ride as smooth as possible).

2A.1. List All Important Kinds of Variations for Each Version
You must use your judgment to decide which variations are important to include in the
instruction. Later, the variations you select will be designed into authentic scenarios for the
demonstrations and practice, to enable the learner to master all those kinds of variations.
Small variations may not require instruction on each. (See Table 6.8 for examples of vari-
ations and Table 6.9 for an example of a scenario.)

2A.2. Categorize the Difficulty of Each Variation
Categorize the difficulty of each variation in relation to the others, using a scale of 1
(easy) to 5 (difficult) (see Table 6.10 for an example). This will allow you to design an
easy-to-difficult sequence of those variations later. If the version is easy, all the variations
are likely easy. If the version is difficult, there should be variations on all five levels of
difficulty. Combinations of the variations indicate the types of real-world scenarios that
the learner might encounter after the training. See the guidance and example presented
in Table 6.11.
    This concludes the process of creating a designer objective for a version of the task, but
it is in the form of a table instead of a sentence (see Table 6.10 for an example). Its purpose

Table 6.8 Examples of Variations for a Version of the Task

Version: Driving a Standard Shift Vehicle in Light Traffic and Bad Weather
Variations                            Examples
Variations in Behaviors               Passing, merging, parallel parking
Variations in Contextual          Familiarity of the route, complexity of the route, bumpiness of the road,
  Conditions    factors              curviness of the road
              Environmental       Weather: amount of rain, amount of snow, iciness, strength of sun in face
                factors           Distractions: noise inside and outside the car, doing other things while
                                     driving
                  Tools and other Size of the vehicle: small car, large car, small truck, 18-wheeler
                    resources     Trailer: yes or no
                                  Transmission: number of gears, with or without synchromesh
                                  GPS: yes or no
Variations in Standards               Arrive as quickly as possible versus drive as safely as possible or make the
                                         ride as smooth as possible


Table 6.9 Example of an Authentic Scenario
One scenario for the version of driving shown in Table 6.7 (standard shift, light traffic, bad weather) could
  be: safety is most important; route and destination are familiar; light snow; quiet inside and outside the
  car; five-speed shift with synchromesh; large car.
                                                                                             Mid-Level ADE 95

Table 6.10 Example of a Designer Objective Showing Difficulty Categorization for Variations of a Version
           of the Task

Version: Driving a Standard Shift Vehicle in Light Traffic and Bad Weather
Variations                                             Factors                                   Difficulty (1–5)
Variations in Behaviors                                Passing                                   3
                                                       Merging                                   3
                                                       Parallel parking                          5
                                                       Hill start                                3–5
Variations in       Contextual factors                 Familiarity of the route                  1–5
  Conditions                                           Complexity of the route                   1–5
                                                       Bumpiness of the road                     1
                                                       Curviness of the road                     1
                    Environmental factors              Weather:
                                                          Amount of rain                         1–5
                                                          Amount of snow                         3–5
                                                          Iciness                                5
                                                          Strength of sun in face                3–5
                                                       Distractions:
                                                          Noise inside and outside the car       1–3
                                                          Doing other things while driving       3–5
                    Tools and other resources          Size of the vehicle:
                                                          Small car                              1
                                                          Large car                              3
                                                          Small truck                            3
                                                          18-wheeler truck                       5
                                                       Trailer:
                                                          Yes                                    5
                                                          No                                     1
                                                       Transmission:
                                                          More gears                             3
                                                          Without synchromesh                    5
                                                       GPS:
                                                          Yes                                    1
                                                          No                                     3
Variations in Standards                                Arrive as quickly as possible             3–5
                                                       Drive as safely as possible               1
                                                       Make ride as smooth as possible           3


is to document information that will be helpful to you to design the learner objectives,
assessments, and instruction (including authentic projects) for the module. It is not to be
presented to the learners, but it is useful for creating the learner objectives later.

2B. For Topic Expertise: Identify Variations within Each Application,
and Create Designer Objectives for the Application
2B.1. List All the Important Kinds of Variations for Each Application
Based on the variety of ways the topic could be useful to the learner in the future (analyzed
in Step 1), now you should make a list of the different types of situations or contexts in
which the topic might be used. During this process, decide on the number of applications
96 Mid-Level ADE

Table 6.11 Designer Objectives: Behaviors, Conditions, and Standards

              Guidance                                                             Example
Behaviors  The learner behaviors state what the learners will need to be able • Drive a car
             to do on the job for this version of the task. Be sure to capture • Park a car
             variations in the behavior within the version of the task (for all
             the conditions). Use action verbs and ensure the capability is
             observable, measurable, reliable, and verifiable.
Conditions The conditions identify the simplifying conditions that distinguish • A small car
             this version of the task from other versions, but also the         • Good weather
             conditions that create variations within this version of the task, • No traffic
             such as contextual factors, objects, events, human behaviors, • A familiar simple route
             words, and/or symbols that are present in the real world           • No need to parallel
             for this version of the task. Be sure to list all the ways the       park
             conditions can vary for this version of the task. Conditions       • No hill starts
             might include the following:
                 • Is the learner allowed to use a checklist or other job aid?
                 • What kinds of tools/test equipment should the learner be
                   able to use?
                 • What environmental conditions should the learner be able
                   to deal with?
                 • May learners ask questions while performing the learned
                   capability?
Standards     The standards of performance define the criteria for acceptable      • No accidents
                performance of this version of the task by the learner. They are   • No close calls (for
                stated in such terms as completeness, accuracy requirements,         accidents)
                time constraints, performance rates, or qualitative                • No traffic violations
                requirements. They identify the measure of proficiency the         • Smooth clutch work
                learners should achieve when they perform the behavior under       • No grinding of gears
                the specified conditions. The learner’s performance results in
                an output, the quantity or quality of which is compared to the
                standard of performance. The standards should be the same
                as those specified for on-the-job performance unless there is a
                valid reason for setting a different standard.


to include in your instruction, which depends on the amount of variation in ways the topic
can be applied that are important to the target learners. These are based primarily on vari-
ations in behaviors for applying topics in the conditions under which the topic may be used in
the real world. Standards of performance could also vary from one application to another.
See Table 6.12 for an example.

2B.2. Categorize the Difficulty of Each Variation
Categorize the difficulty of each variation in relation to the others, using a scale of 1 (easy)
to 5 (difficult) (see Table 6.13 for an example). This will allow you to design an easy-to-dif-
ficult sequence of those variations later. If the topic is easy, all the variations are likely easy.
If the topic is difficult, there should be variations on all levels of difficulty. Combinations
of the variations indicate the types of real-world scenarios that the learner might encounter
after the training.
                                                                                        Mid-Level ADE 97

Table 6.12 Example of Important Variations for an Application
For the following application of the topic “supply and demand”:
• Make predictions related to proposed government policies

The important variations might include:
• Different kinds of purchasable things addressed by a policy
  ο Goods
  ο Services
  ο Stocks
  ο Money
• Different kinds of policies
  ο Ones related to controlling the price (e.g., increasing the minimum wage)
  ο Ones related to increasing or decreasing the supply (e.g., reducing subsidies to oil producers)
  ο Ones related to increasing or decreasing the demand (e.g., increasing the gasoline tax)
• Different kinds of performances
  ο Deciding how to vote for a candidate or referendum
  ο Convincing a friend to take a position regarding the policy
  ο Discussing the pros and cons of a policy in polite conversation


Table 6.13 Example of a Designer Objective Showing Difficulty Categorization for
           Variations of an Application

For the variations shown in Table 6.12                                     Difficulty
• Different kinds of purchasable things addressed by a policy
  ο Goods                                                                      1
  ο Services                                                                   4
  ο Stocks                                                                     3
  ο Money                                                                      5
• Different kinds of policies
  ο Ones related to controlling the price                                      3
  ο Ones related to increasing or decreasing the supply                        4
  ο Ones related to increasing or decreasing the demand                        4
• Different kinds of performances
  ο Deciding how to vote for a candidate or referendum                         3
  ο Convincing a friend to take a position regarding the policy                5
  ο Discussing the pros and cons of a policy in polite conversation            4


    Guidelines for developing designer objectives are shown in Table 6.14, along with an
example. They constitute the process for creating the designer objective for an applica-
tion. This kind of objective is not to be presented to the learners. It is intended to guide
the instructional designer and will be the foundation for developing the learner objectives,
assessments, and instruction (including authentic applications) for each topic. However, it
is in the form of a table instead of a sentence (see Table 6.15 for an example and Table 6.24
for a blank template). The form includes a place to indicate whether the topic entails pri-
marily conceptual or theoretical understanding or an equal combination of the two.
    Since topics are typically described at different levels of detail (topics, subtopics, sub-
subtopics), we recommend developing designer objectives for each level at which
learner assessment will occur. Further, we propose that assessment should always occur at
the lowest level, to ensure mastery of all important knowledge and skills. Then, assessment
98 Mid-Level ADE

Table 6.14 Guidelines and Example for Creating Designer Objectives

                 Guidelines                                        Example for Law of Supply & Demand
Conditions     The conditions are the range of situations under • A change in the price of a good,
                  which each understanding is expected to be      service, labor, money, stock, or rent
                  used by the learner in the real world.        • Information about changes in supply
                                                                  and/or demand
Behaviors      • For concepts: state the dimensions of          • Explain why the price changed
                 understanding needed.
               • For natural-process principles: state the
                 nature of the descriptions needed.
               • For causal principles: state the nature of the
                 predictions, explanations and/or problem
                 solving needed.
               • The statements should take a form that aids
                 in developing assessments.
Standards      These define the criteria for mastery of the     • Correct on 10 performances in a row
                  topic. The standards should be the same as
                  those needed in the real world.
Assessment     A description of the way in which mastery of the • A narrative about the changes, and a
   Instruments    topic will be measured.                         short short-answer response



Table 6.15 Form for Listing Designer Objectives for Each Topic
                           Mid-Level ADE Document for Topic Expertise
Name of Topic: Law of supply & demand                                   x
Number of Applications: 3                            □ Conceptual       □ Theoretical      □ Hybrid
List of Applications: A. Explain the causes of changes in prices, B. Explain the causes of changes in
                      supply, C. Explain the causes of changes in demand.
Sequence of Applications: A followed by either B or C
Name of Application 1: A. Explain causes of changes in prices
Variations            Factors                                          Difficulty (1–5)
Conditions
Given …               • A change in the price of a good, service,      (Listed in order from 1–5)
                         labor, stock, rent, or money
                      • Information available about changes in         Both are 3
                         supply and/or demand
Behaviors
The learner will …    • Explain based on supply as a causal factor     3
                      • Explain based on demand as a causal factor     3
Standards
To this standard …    Correct on 10 performances in a row
Learner Assessment
As measured by …      A narrative about the changes, and a short-answer response


at any higher levels, as needed, ensures that learners can combine their lower-level knowl-
edge and skills effectively.
   It is helpful to categorize applications by difficulty (perhaps on a scale of 1–5) so
you can later provide the appropriate level of difficulty to each learner.
                                                                           Mid-Level ADE 99
3. Formatively Evaluate the Findings
This guidance is the same for both task and topic expertise.
   Your formative evaluation still cannot involve tryouts with learners because the design
decisions are still too general, so among the options described in Chapter 10 (Formative
Evaluation), you should conduct an expert review of the results of Steps 1 and 2 with
both content experts and, especially for large projects, instructional experts (preferably
people who are experts in both the content and teaching it to your target learners) by
means of a walk-through exercise. Review and evaluate the sequence (from Step 1) and the
variations and designer objectives (from Step 2) with the SMEs to enhance appropriate-
ness, accuracy, effectiveness, and appeal. Also, get input from the experts on what changes
they think would likely improve the content and design, and either make revisions during
the walk-through exercise, or as soon as possible after it. Refer to your evaluation plan for
the project and Chapter 10 for guidance.
   Also, for a quantitative approach to rapid prototyping (described in Chapter 4), when
the above is done for the one version of the task or one topic (or even just one subtopic,
depending on scope), proceed to the next step. Otherwise, perform this step for all the
tasks and topics, and then proceed.

4. Develop Learner Objectives for Each Version or Application
You have already created the designer objectives. Now you can use those to create the
objectives that are to be presented to the learners, if you think they would be helpful to the
learners at this mid level of the ADE process. Learner objectives can be designed for the
full range of scopes of the instruction, from a single comprehensive objective for an entire
course, to an objective for each of the hundreds of individual facts, skills, understandings,
and attitudes in the course (discussed in Chapter 8). At this mid level of design, you should
only design the objectives for whole tasks and versions or whole topics and applications.
In lower-level design (Chapters 7 and 8), you will address smaller units of content. At this
mid level of design, learner objectives will primarily address learners’ ability to combine the
smaller bits of content into broader performances of tasks or applications of topics. You
should decide whether you think learner objectives are helpful on all four scopes – duty or
subject, task or topic, version or application, and single fact, skill, understanding, or atti-
tude – but formative evaluation can help you make this determination in your ID project.
   Learner objectives, which are often called instructional objectives, should communicate
what learners will be able to do upon completion of the instruction (intended outcomes).
They should not state what the instruction or instructor will do. For example, “to provide
practice opportunities” is a description of the instructional process, not a learner objective.
   There are two basic forms of learner objectives: those that describe the desired per-
formance, which are abstract, and those that demonstrate it, which are concrete. Research
shows that abstract objectives are often not helpful to learning, primarily because they
are usually difficult for learners to make sense of. Research has shown that a concrete
demonstration objective, initially called a “work model” (Bunderson, Gibbons, Olsen,
& Kearsley, 1981), is most useful. It entails demonstrating a prototypical performance (a
concrete example), usually through a video or live demonstration. Table 6.16 shows exam-
ples of both kinds of objectives.
   The demonstration objective is a performance-based objective that aligns well with
performance-based instruction and performance-based assessments. For well-designed
instruction, learner objectives serve only to orient the learners to what they should learn,
100 Mid-Level ADE

Table 6.16 Examples of Abstract and Demonstration Objectives for Learners

Abstract Objective                                             Demonstration Objective
The learner will be able to drive a car in city traffic        A video of a person driving a car safely in city
  without an accident                                             traffic


Table 6.17 Kinds of Learner Objectives for the Two Major Kinds of Instruction

Learner-Centered Instruction (LCI)*               Teacher-Centered Instruction**
For LCI, you should develop demonstration If you decided to use this approach, you should still use
  objectives, rather than abstract objectives. demonstration objectives if you can, but you may need
  However, it is also sometimes helpful        to resort to abstract objectives. If abstract, they should
  to tell the learners a few of the most       be designed to not overwhelm the learner with a lot of
  common ways the conditions may vary          information to remember. It is not very helpful to say a lot
  and the criteria for judging successful      about conditions and standards. Abstract objectives are
  performance (standards). In some cases,      most effective to the extent that they relate what is to be
  it may not be feasible or cost-effective     learned to what the learner already knows. Sometimes it
  to create demonstration objectives,          is sufficient to just state the goal, perhaps with one or two
  in which case you may choose to              conditions and standards. Other times it is also helpful to
  create abstract ones. For example,           describe the behaviors or actions the learner will be able
  unobservable performances cannot be          to perform to achieve the goal (learned capabilities). All
  demonstrated.                                of these were identified in the designer objectives, so now
                                               you only need to carefully choose the components that will
                                               most concisely aid learning.
* Learner-centered instruction is personalized, self-directed, and self-paced.
** Teacher-centered instruction is standardized, teacher-directed, and group-paced.


so you should not provide a lot of details about conditions and standards (Hartley &
Davies, 1976). Those details are useful for the designer, but not for orienting the learner.
    The nature of the learner objective is usually different for learner-centered than for
teacher-centered instruction because performance is typically de-emphasized in the latter
(see Table 6.17).
    To develop a demonstration objective, select a prototypical (simple, common, repre-
sentative, and real-world) way in which the objective can be demonstrated (from Step 2,
Identify Variations and Create Designer Objectives), decide whether the demonstration
will be live, video, or descriptive (e.g., a very short story), and identify exactly what will
be demonstrated (Bunderson et al., 1981). For unobservable skills, a story that reveals the
thinking and decision-making process of the performer can approximate a demonstration
objective, but that may not always be sufficiently advantageous compared to an abstract
objective. Sometimes it is helpful to tell the learners a few of the most common ways the
conditions may vary and the criteria for judging successful performance (standards). For
more guidance about this, see the guidance for designing demonstrations in Chapter 8,
Instructing.
    For an abstract objective, you may use up to three parts: the behavior (learned capabil-
ity), the range of conditions for performance, and the standards the performance should
meet (Mager, 1975) – three of the four elements in the designer objective. It is not always
helpful to tell the learners what the conditions and standards are. It is recommended to
use measurable verbs for abstract objectives (Mager, 1975). The categories of learning
                                                                                      Mid-Level ADE 101

Table 6.18 Measurable Verbs Aligned to the Categories of Learning

Memorize Information   Understand Relationships   Apply Skills      Apply Higher-Order Skills
Choose                 Classify                   Apply             Analyze          Argue        Build
Define                 Compare                    Use               Attribute        Assess       Change
Identify               Describe                   Develop           Break down       Check        Compose
Label                  Discuss                    Show              Categorize       Criticize    Construct
List                   Exemplify                  Execute           Classify         Critique     Create
Match                  Explain                    Implement         Compare          Evaluate     Design
Name                   Illustrate                 Organize          Contrast         Judge        Develop
Recall                 Infer                      Solve             Differentiate    Prioritize   Formulate
Recognize              Interpret                  Prepare           Distinguish      Prove        Generate
Select                 Summarize                  Modify            Examine          Rank         Invent
Show                                                                Relate           Rate         Plan
Tell                                                                                 Support      Produce


described in Chapter 3 (memorize information, understand relationships, apply skills,
apply higher-order skills, and act on attitudes and values) can be useful for writing measur-
able objectives. You can use the SMART acronym to aid in evaluating your abstract learner
objectives: ensure that they are Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Timely.
Table 6.18 provides a list of measurable verbs aligned to the categories of learning.
   You could conduct formative evaluation (described in Step 8) of Step 4 now, but it is
more efficient to evaluate learner objectives and assessments at the same time.
   For a quantitative approach to rapid prototyping (described in Chapter 4), when the
above is done for the one version of the task or one topic (or even just one subtopic,
depending on scope), proceed to the next step. Otherwise, perform this step for all the
tasks and topics, and then proceed.

5. Design Appropriate Kinds of Learner Assessments
   for the Version or Application
Criterion-Referenced vs. Norm-Referenced Assessments
There are two basic types of assessments: criterion-referenced and norm-referenced. A cri-
terion-referenced assessment compares learner performance to a predefined standard (crite-
rion) as identified in your designer objective (Cronbach, 1970; Shrock & Coscarelli, 2007). A
norm-referenced assessment is designed to yield scores that compare each learner’s perfor-
mance with that of a group (a norm established by performances of all the learners). Norm-
referenced assessments are used for selection rather than to ensure mastery. There are some
situations where selection (norm-referenced assessment) is appropriate (e.g., training for the
Navy Seals), but criterion-referenced assessment is usually more appropriate, since learning
is typically more important than sorting learners, as is the case with driving a car.
    As with learner objectives, assessments can be designed for the full range of scopes of
the instruction, from a single comprehensive assessment for an entire course, to an assess-
ment for each of the hundreds of individual facts, skills, understandings, and attitudes in
the course. At this point, you should only design the assessments for whole tasks and
versions or whole topics and applications. In lower-level design (Chapters 7 and 8),
you will address smaller units of content. At this mid level of design, you will primarily
assess learners’ ability to combine the smaller bits of content into broader performances
102 Mid-Level ADE
of tasks and applications of topics. Try not to duplicate assessments you will design on the
lower level. You may find it helpful, when you are designing the lower-level assessments,
to return to these mid-level assessments and adjust them as needed to be comprehensive
yet not duplicate the lower-level ones. Also, keep in mind that mid-level assessments can
be used for placement purposes in many contexts.

Performance vs. Predictive Assessments
A criterion-referenced assessment typically needs to be different for learner-centered
instruction than for teacher-centered instruction. For learner-centered instruction they are
usually performance assessments, whereas for teacher-centered instruction they are typically
predictive assessments. However, they sometimes can, and whenever possible should, be per-
formance assessments.
   A performance assessment is one in which the learner actually does a performance
that demonstrates the learner’s level of skill or understanding of the issue. The behavior,
conditions, and standards should all match those in the real world (as closely as possible),
which should be reflected in the designer objective. Many versions of a task involve many
different ways of performing the task that ought to be assessed, and many applications of
a topic involve many different variations that should be assessed in one or more integrated
performances. To best prepare learners for the assessment, practice events should be inter-
changeable with the performance assessment events (but not repeated in them, for then the
learner would only need to remember the practice event being repeated). In fact, it is good
to fully integrate the assessment with the practice by requiring the learner to perform a certain
number of practice events correctly in a row, unaided. The criterion for the number of cor-
rect responses in a row should increase as the scope of the task or topic increases (e.g., a
small scope might warrant only, say, four correct responses in a row, whereas a large scope
might warrant, say, 12 correct responses in a row. For example, assessment for driving a car
should include assessments for different sized cars, kinds of transmissions, weather condi-
tions, traffic conditions, kinds of intersections, parking requirements, hill starts, and so forth.
Performance assessments must have content validity, which is consistency between the assess-
ment and the nature of the performances needed in the real world. This is true in both perfor-
mance and predictive assessments. Learner objectives and assessments should be consistent
with the designer objectives, which should be consistent with the real-world requirements.
   Predictive assessments are used when performance assessments are too time con-
suming or expensive or if it is difficult for a performance to adequately measure mastery
of the full breadth of the skills (for a task) or understandings (for a topic). A predictive
assessment tests part of the content represented by the understandings or skills, and from
that it makes a prediction as to whether the learner has mastered the understandings or
skills. For example, if a learner could describe the law of supply and demand, there is a
better probability that the learner could actually apply that understanding in real-world
situations than a learner who could not describe it. Assessments that do not test the actual
application of the understandings or skills are valid only to the extent that they accurately
predict learner application of the understandings or skills in the real world. For more on
predictive validity, see Cronbach & Meehl (1955).

Characteristics of Assessments
There are several characteristics to be considered when developing assessments. These
characteristics ensure that the assessments measure what is intended each time they
                                                                                                 Mid-Level ADE 103

Table 6.19 Characteristics of Assessments

Characteristic     Definition
Validity        Construct validity – degree to which the assessment measures the content (information,
   (Note:         understanding, skill, or attribute) it is intended to measure.
   different    Content validity – degree to which the assessment measures all the content it is intended
   experts        to measure.
   categorize Criterion-related validity – degree to which the assessment can accurately predict
   validity       specific criterion variables. It includes concurrent validity, which involves assessments
   somewhat       administered at the same time, and predictive validity, which measures the degree to
   differently)   which the assessment predicts the target performance(s).
                Face validity – degree to which an expert believes the assessment serves its purposes well.
Reliability        Degree to which the assessment yields the same results consistently:
                   Test-retest – consistency across two administrations to the same learners.
                   Split-halves – consistency across two forms of the same assessment.
Usability          Assessments that are easy to administer, score, and interpret and for the learner to take.



are administered. The same applies to practice items. The characteristics are shown in
Table 6.19.
Develop Assessments
For guidance on how to develop an assessment (Cohen & Wollack, 2013; Mager, 1997) for
each version of the task or each topic, see Table 6.20. When you have finished developing
an assessment for the version or application (for a quantitative approach to rapid proto-
typing) or for all versions and applications (in all other cases), proceed to the next step.
   You could conduct formative evaluation (described in Step 8) of Steps 4 and 5 now,
but it is more efficient to evaluate learner objectives, assessments, and instruction at the
same time.

6. Design the Ways That Learning by Doing Will Be Accomplished
Based on the results of Steps 1–5, you should revise and elaborate your high-level instruc-
tional methods from Step 2 in Chapter 5. Additionally, you should design the ways learn-
ing by doing will be accomplished (the nature of the projects for task expertise and of
applications for topic expertise). Refer to Chapter 4 for information about various learn-
ing-by-doing approaches.

6A. For Task Expertise: Design the Ways Learning by
Doing Will Be Accomplished for Each Version
You should holistically design the project(s)1 for each version.

6A.1. Decide about the Project Environment and Number of Projects
Decide what the project environment will be like in general (e.g., real, staged, simulated, or
narrated) and whether or not learners will be organized into teams. Regarding the project
1    Please keep in mind that we use the term “projects” to refer to all cases of learning by doing, such as problems, tasks,
     inquiries, and applications.
104 Mid-Level ADE

Table 6.20 How to Develop an Assessment for a Whole Version or Topic

For Learner-Centered Instruction*                           For Teacher-Centered Instruction**
Assessments are most effective at measuring learning Whenever feasible, use performance-based
  when they are performance-based, meaning that        assessment (see Learner-Centered Instruction
  they assess performance of authentic versions        column). If not feasible, develop a predictive
  of the task. Therefore, the assessment for a         assessment that comes as close to this ideal as
  version should be similar to the demonstration       possible. For example, you can still present a
  objective, except that the learner has to do it for  scenario for a particular performance situation
  multiple diverse cases instead of being shown        and ask the learners to state how they would
  how to do it for just one case or one kind of        perform that version of the task or accomplish
  case. If feasible for your instructional situation   that application of the topic. You could even
  (sometimes it is too expensive or time consuming     give a multiple-choice test in which they need to
  for the extra benefit), develop a performance-       select the way they would perform the version
  based assessment that assesses mastery of the full   or accomplish the application for each part of
  range of variations in the task – that samples all   the process in that scenario. However, there are
  the equivalence classes – or full range of uses for  disadvantages of multiple-choice assessments.
  a topic. Note that the assessment does not have      Foremost is that the learner performance in such
  to be separate from the instruction – it could       an assessment is seldom an authentic performance
  merely require that the learner perform (practice)   (consistent with the real-world performance). This
  unaided successfully for a certain number of         makes it more difficult to assess true expertise.
  performances in a row, much like unlocking the       Multiple-choice also typically has a 25% chance
  next level in a computer game.                       that the learner will get it right by luck.
* Learner-centered instruction is personalized, self-directed, and self-paced.
** Teacher-centered instruction is standardized, teacher-directed, and group-paced.

environment, the context in which something is learned influences not only what is learned,
but also how well it can be used (transferred) in the future. Learning is situated in the context
and gains meaning from that context. If a task is learned in an authentic context, it will be eas-
ier to perform in that kind of context. If the version is very complex, the learning load can be
eased by removing contextual complexity, but, by the end of the instruction (if not sooner),
the project environment should be highly similar to the real-world environment. Regarding
teams, they should be used when the real-world project involves a team, but also when
the interaction among learners can supply learning support through tutoring and feedback.
For example, peer tutoring can be very effective and cost-effective for improving learning.
Furthermore, collaboration increases motivation for most learners. However, with teams,
you must ensure that each individual has mastered the task, not just the team as a whole.
    Also, decide how many projects are needed for learners to master this version of the
task. The number of projects depends on how much variation exists within the version.
It is important to make sure the learners can generalize across the variations that will be
encountered in the real world. However, sometimes budgetary or time constraints prevent
you from being able to include the number of projects that would ensure mastery across
all variations. The projected costs of lack of full mastery should be weighed against such
constraints. In many cases, you should find ways to lift those constraints rather than sac-
rifice needed competence.

6A.2. Design the Scenario for Each Project
Use the information from Step 2 above (on the variations you identified in the real-world
task) to design the scenarios for (or nature of) easy, medium, and difficult authentic
                                                                                  Mid-Level ADE 105

Table 6.21 Example of a Scenario for Application of a Topic
One of the applications for supply and demand is to make decisions about economic policies for you to
  support or oppose. One scenario could be to explore the pros and cons of increasing the minimum
  wage: predict what effects it would have on unemployment – the number of jobs available (supplied)
  compared to the number of people seeking jobs (demand).



projects for this version of the task (see Table 6.21 for an example). Keep in mind that,
although objectives can be classified from easy to difficult, here we are talking about the
difficulty of each project within a single (fairly large) objective. If the objective is easy, all
the projects will likely be easy. If the objective is difficult, there should be projects on all
three levels of difficulty.
   A scenario should include the goals of the version of the task, an authentic cover story,
the players and their authentic roles, the scenario operations (activities the learners do)
and their consequences, the resources (e.g., information, tools, and other resources that
are available in the real-world task environment), and any other relevant conditions (e.g.,
opponents, obstacles, allies, etc.) (Schank, Berman, & Macpherson, 1999; Schank, Fano,
Jona, & Bell, 1993).

6A.3. Develop Details of the Project for Each Scenario
Finally, design the remaining details for each project (e.g., tools, resources, instructions,
simulations, roles, narratives), keeping in mind your latest designs for the instruction. Try
to replicate feedback that would occur in the real-world environment (consequences or
effects that naturally result from the learner’s actions), but include other kinds of feedback
when useful. (See Chapter 8 for more guidance about feedback.)
   You could conduct formative evaluation (described in Step 8) of Steps 4–6 now, but
you may find it helpful to evaluate learner instruction and media at the same time.

6B. For Topic Expertise: Design the Ways Learning by Doing
Will Be Accomplished for Each Application
6B.1. Design a Scenario for Each Variation of Each Application
Design a scenario for each variation (see Table 6.21 for an example), as a meaningful
context for the instruction and assessments on the topic. A scenario should include the
goals of the application of the topic, an authentic cover story, the players and their authen-
tic roles, the scenario operations (activities the learners do) and their consequences, the
resources (e.g., information, tools, and other resources that are available in the real-world
task environment), and any other relevant conditions (e.g., opponents, obstacles, allies,
etc.) (Schank et al., 1999; Schank et al., 1993).

6B.2. Develop Details of the Scenario for each Variation
For each scenario, develop details (e.g., characters, activities, tools, resources, instructions,
simulations, roles, narratives), keeping in mind your latest designs for the instruction. Try
to replicate feedback that would occur in the real-world environment (consequences or
effects that naturally result from the learner’s actions) but include other kinds of feedback
106 Mid-Level ADE
when useful. (See Chapter 8 for more guidance about feedback.) Scenarios could be pre-
sented in various formats, including text, text and images, animations, and videos with
actors. Both authentic and fantasy contexts could be used for scenarios, as long as the
nature of the performances is authentic. Think about how your scenarios will be presented
to learners while developing details.
   You could conduct formative evaluation (described in Step 8) of Steps 4–6 now, but
you may find it helpful to evaluate learner instruction and media at the same time.

7. Select Media in General for the Version or Application
On the top level of design, you tentatively selected delivery method(s) and identified media
options based on constraints and preferences (selection by rejection and selection by opti-
mization). Given the information and design decisions you have made on this mid level
of design, you may wish to modify and tailor your earlier decisions, and you should now
consider the best media mix for each version of each task or each application of each topic,
taking into account the types of media available and five rules for media selection, described
next.

Types of Media
No single medium is the most appropriate choice for every instructional situation. Selecting
the appropriate media ensures that the instruction is provided by the most cost-effective
and appealing means possible. This mid-level design activity can be done for each part of
the instruction (each variation of a version or application) as you design the ways that
learning by doing will be done (in Step 6), rather than waiting until it has all been designed.
Be sure to take into consideration the constraints and preferences that you identified in
the top-level instructional design (Chapter 5), but in some cases you may want to try to
remove one or more of the constraints you identified. For example, you may advocate
with your client to increase the budget for more expensive media that you believe will be
worth the extra investment.
    Many different types of media exist for instruction. Examples of human media range
from the classroom instructor, to teaching assistants, peer tutors, and on-the-job coaches;
and examples of nonhuman media include study guides, books, hands-on materials, net-
worked computers, mobile devices, and much more. Some of the most common types are
shown in Table 6.22. (Note: if copyrighted media are selected, get copyright permission.)
    Printed text. This is the most abstract and consequently often the least effective – but
also least expensive – medium. To gain meaning from printed text, the learner must be
able to read (that is, decode words and comprehend what is written). Learning is more
difficult because physical cues are absent. The learner cannot query the author when there
is ambiguity in the message. But most significantly, the learner seldom can learn by doing,
and when the learner is instructed to do some practice, it is rarely an authentic perfor-
mance and any feedback provided is rudimentary.
    Pictures and text. The addition of still pictures and diagrams to printed text makes the
instruction more concrete and consequently more effective but also more expensive. In
order to understand text, one often needs to look at a picture or diagram of objects, pro-
cedures, processes, or relationships, but the text also helps one to understand the picture
or diagram.
    Video. Video – in all its various formats, including animations like “explainer videos” –
is important when motion is involved, as in the performance of a skill and the observation
                                                                                      Mid-Level ADE 107

Table 6.22 Types of Instructional Media

Media Type        Representative Examples    Advantages                         Disadvantages
Humans            Instructors                Flexible, adaptable to the learner Can be expensive
                  Teaching assistants        Appeal to learners who like the May not be engaging
                  Fellow learners               personal touch
                  Experts                    Can be role models
Classroom Aids Slides                        Can offer additional affordances, Are outdated
               Blackboards                     such as visuals and motion,     Require additional equipment,
               Whiteboards                     that can increase attention,       complex setup, and careful
               Overhead projectors             learning, and emotional            coordination during
               Video projectors                impact for learners                planning, preparation,
                                                                                  and use
                                                                               Equipment and production
                                                                                  costs are higher
                                                                               Are not interactive
Digital Media     Computers and mobile       Present text information, graphic Require computers, digital
                     devices                    images, streaming videos             tablets, or smartphones
                  Video (e.g., TV, DVDs)     Interact with learners on individual Require essential hardware
                  Audio (e.g., radio,           basis through asking questions       and software for
                     podcasts, streaming        and judging responses                development and use
                     audio)                  Maintain record of responses         Incompatibility of hardware
                  Interactive white boards   Adapt instruction to needs of           and software among
                  Internet                      learner                              various systems
                  Social networks            Control other media hardware
                  Simulators                 Can interface computer and
                  VR/AR                         video for learner-controlled
                                                programs
Paper Media       Books                      Include common types of           Sophisticated types are more
                  Journals                      materials                         costly to prepare
                  Workbooks                  Wide variety of applications      Require suitable reading
                  Worksheets                 Simple types are quick to prepare    ability
                                                                               Are not interactive or
                                                                                  dynamic
Hands-On        Equipment or materials Provide a greater level of realism Can be expensive and
  Materials and Mock-ups                  and motivation                    difficult to obtain
  Authentic     Simulators                                                Logistics of use can be a
  Experiences                                                               problem



of causal dynamics. It can also better capture emotional aspects of a situation. However,
video generally has a linear format, delivery is often at a fixed pace, and it is more expen-
sive to produce than pictures and text. It also removes cues that are available from han-
dling the real equipment. But it can be edited to compress time in a demonstration, and it
is typically less expensive than interactive media.
    Interactive media. Interactive media (often called multimedia, but some multimedia
are not interactive) offer all the benefits of the above media, but they add interactivity.
They can register learner performances or responses and judge whether they are cor-
rect and even determine the nature of the error or misconception to provide customized
108 Mid-Level ADE
feedback to the learner. Other benefits include the capability to pause or “rewind” a dem-
onstration and to retry part of a performance. This choice is more expensive to develop,
but it can be less expensive than live instruction and performances with physical objects if
a lot of learners will be using the instruction. It can also be less expensive if the objects are
very expensive (like airplanes), and it is safer if the performance is hazardous. Immersive
technologies – such as virtual reality (VR), augmented reality (AR), and 360 video – make
learning more immersive, authentic, interactive, engaging, and personalized. For example,
VR allows learners to explore new worlds and new identities otherwise inaccessible to
them. And AI-powered chatbots provide powerful ways of enhancing learning. Interactive
media also make interaction and collaboration among learners possible.
   Physical objects. Situations that involve physical objects are the most concrete and
easy to understand because they don't require the translation of symbols. When instruc-
tion is done with real objects, all the cues for later performance are typically available.
Real objects can be used by instructors in demonstrations to a group of learners, but the
learner cannot pause or rewind that demonstration. Physical objects can also be used by
the learner to manipulate (practice). Through handling them, the learner gains much infor-
mation about their size, texture, sturdiness, complexity, and other features, which adds
important elements to the learner’s schema for the task and aids transfer to real-world
situations. However, situations with real objects may be very complex or hazardous, and
it may be safer and less expensive to use a simplification in the form of a mock-up or
simulation.
   Experts. In many situations the most effective medium is an expert, typically working
one-on-one with the learner on real problems in a real situation. For example, if the skill
to be learned was predicting the effects of changes in educational policy, the ideal situation
would seem to be to pair a novice with an expert and have the expert explain the considera-
tions while the novice engages in that exercise, as is typically done in on-the-job training. In
such a case, the expert should provide all the appropriate instructional strategies. However,
there are some situations in which this is not as efficient or effective as interactive media
that allow compression of time, greater safety, opportunity to pause and rewind a demon-
stration, and opportunity to repeat parts of a task or application of a topic in a simulator
(e.g., landings in an airplane or predictions about the effects of changes in prices of goods).

Rules for Media Selection
On the top level, you addressed such constraints as affordability, availability, cost-effec-
tiveness, administrative feasibility, and practical feasibility. You also addressed what might
be ideal for the content, instructional methods, learners, and teachers. Given the addi-
tional information you now have about both content and instructional methods, you
should revisit those media selection decisions and tailor them to your instructional designs
for each individual version or topic. We offer the following five rules for such tailoring,
adapted from Romiszowski (1988). The first two have to do with media characteristics
or affordances that make media either suitable or unsuitable for particular instructional
situations.

1. Sensory Channel
Use the most appropriate sensory channels for communicating the information to be
learned. For example, use audio for music appreciation and video (motion visuals) for
bicycle repair.
                                                                         Mid-Level ADE 109
2. Performance and Feedback Capabilities
Given that you expect a certain performance from the learner after the instruction, you
should use a medium that provides opportunities to practice that behavior during instruc-
tion (e.g., hands-on materials for bicycle repair), with a medium that can assess the quality
of the learner response and provide helpful feedback. The fidelity of the performance
situation to the real-world situation should take learner experience into consideration. It is
generally better to begin teaching a novice in a low-fidelity situation, so that the amount of
information and “noise” is reduced to a manageable level, thus preventing cognitive over-
load. As the learner’s expertise develops, the fidelity of the learning environment should be
progressively increased, to improve transfer to the post-instructional situation. Therefore,
you may use very different (less expensive) media early in the instruction than later.

3. Learner Preferences
If learners have different preferences for certain media, use several media so each learner
can attend to the media that they prefer. For example, some learners may prefer visuals,
such as graphics, while others may prefer verbal descriptions.

4. Cost-Effectiveness
Consider the cost-effectiveness of each medium, weighing the advantages of each medium
in comparison to its costs. Be sure to take into account the cost of developing and/or
licensing the instruction for that medium and the cost of using, maintaining, and updating
the medium in the instructional setting (e.g., computers and instructor salaries). Multimedia
can be expensive to develop and implement (equipment), but it can be less expensive than
instructors if there will be a large number of learners over the life of the instruction.

5. Practical Usage
Consider how well the media will operate in the learning environment (including the skills
and attitudes of the learning guide or teacher, as well as the learner – and note any training
that may be needed), and how easily the media can be maintained and updated.

Other Considerations
In addition, it is helpful to consider the following questions:

•    Who should control the media: teacher or learner?
•    What collaboration capabilities should the media have: none (for individual use) or
     many (for collaborative use)?
•    What other capabilities (e.g., content creation and sharing capabilities) should the
     media have to facilitate learner-centered instruction?
•    How easy should it be to modify the content and/or instructional methods?

Finally, based on your decisions about media selection for each version or application,
you should estimate production time and expense for each version or application. If
resources are not sufficient, try to get more, or go with less expensive media, or prioritize
versions or applications and drop lower-priority ones. Also, we suggest that this is a good
110 Mid-Level ADE
time for you to look for existing instructional resources (media) that you could procure
(and possibly modify) instead of creating your own.

8. Formatively Evaluate Your Designs and Revise
   Your Project Management Plan
Formatively Evaluate and Revise Your Designs with Experts
Your formative evaluation still cannot involve tryouts with learners because the design
decisions are still too general, so among the options described in Chapter 10 (Formative
Evaluation), you should conduct an expert review of the results of Steps 4–7 with both con-
tent experts and, especially for large ID projects, instructional experts (preferably people who
are experts in both the content and teaching it to your target learners) by means of a walk-
through exercise. Review and evaluate the learner objectives (from Step 4), learner assess-
ments (from Step 5), methods of learning by doing (from Step 6), and general media selections
(from Step 7) with the experts to enhance appropriateness, accuracy, effectiveness, and appeal
by getting input from the experts on what changes they think would likely improve the content
and design, and either make revisions during the walk-through exercise, or as soon as possible
after it. Refer to your evaluation plan for the project and Chapter 10 for guidance.
   Record all the important design decisions in your mid-level ADE document, which you
should be preparing during each step of the mid-level ADE process and revising during or
after your formative evaluation and revisions. Tables 6.23 and 6.24 present templates for
mid-level ADE documents for task expertise and topic expertise, respectively. We encour-
age you to improve on these templates according to your particular needs and working styles.

Update Your Project Management Plan
With a clearer idea of how best to design the needed instruction, you can review instruc-
tion previously developed for the same or similar instructional needs and adopt, adapt,
or reject what is available before embarking on a totally fresh (and more expensive) ID
endeavor. Consequently, you should revise your project management plan (developed
with guidance in Chapter 2 and updated in Chapter 5) based on any appropriate instruc-
tion you have found or expect to find.

Where Are We?
You had previously completed the top-level ADE for both task and topic expertise, result-
ing in a top-level ADE document showing the selection and sequencing of the major
“chunks” of the content and the selection of high-level instructional methods (Chapter 5).
In this chapter, you added some more detail to this fuzzy vision of your new instructional
system. This entailed:

 1. Identifying and sequencing versions of each task or applications of each topic
 2. Identifying variations within each version or application and creating designer
    objectives
 3. Formatively evaluating the results
 4. Developing learner objectives
 5. Designing appropriate kinds of learner assessments
 6. Designing the ways learning by doing will be accomplished for each version or topic
 7. Selecting media in general
 8. Formatively evaluating and documenting the results
                                                                            Mid-Level ADE 111

Table 6.23 Template for a Mid-Level ADE Document for Task Expertise (Use One Form for Each Version
           of the Task)




The next chapter (Chapter 7) provides guidance for conducting a lower-level ADE
for both task and topic expertise, again based on the major considerations described
in Chapters 3 and 4. Chapter 8 completes the ADE process with guidance for the
design of tutorials for lower-level design. Finally, Develop and Deploy are addressed in
Chapters 9–12. The whole ADE process is again summarized in Table 6.25.
112   Mid-Level ADE

Table 6.24 Template for a Mid-Level ADE Document for Topic Expertise (Use One Form for Each
           Application of the Topic)




Exercises
Here again we offer suggestions for a professor using this book as a textbook in a course,
to help the students understand more deeply the contents of this chapter. We suggest that
you keep the same teams of about three students each to continue to work on their ID
projects throughout the course. However, these exercises can be done individually by any
reader who wants to deepen their understanding and skills.
                                                                                     Mid-Level ADE 113

Table 6.25 ADE Process for Task Expertise and Topic Expertise (Differences Are in Bold)

           Task Expertise                                     Topic Expertise
Top        1. Select and sequence top-level content           1. Select and sequence top-level content
  Level    2. Plan high-level instructional methods           2. Plan high-level instructional methods
  Ch. 5    3. Formatively evaluate and document the top-      3. Formatively evaluate and document the
              level design                                       top-level design
Mid        1. Identify and sequence versions of each          1. Identify and sequence applications of
  Level       task                                               each topic
  Ch. 6    2. Identify variations within each version and     2. Identify variations within each
              create designer objectives                         application and create designer objectives
           3. Formatively evaluate the findings               3. Formatively evaluate the findings
           4. Develop the learner objectives for each         4. Develop the learner objectives for each
              version                                            topic
           5. Design learner assessments for each version     5. Design learner assessments for each topic
           6. Design the ways that learning by doing will     6. Design the ways that learning by doing
              be accomplished for each version                   will be accomplished for each topic
           7. Select media in general for the version         7. Select media in general for the application
           8. Formatively evaluate and document the           8. Formatively evaluate and document the
              results                                            results
Lower      1. Select and sequence the organizing content      1. Select and sequence the organizing
  Level       for each version of the task                       content for each topic
  Ch. 7    2. Select and classify the supporting content      2. Select and classify the supporting content
              for each version                                   for each topic
           3. Sequence the supporting content for each        3. Sequence the supporting content for each
              version                                            topic
           4. Evaluate and document the findings              4. Evaluate and document the findings
           5. Identify resource requirements, availability,   5. Identify resource requirements, availability,
              and existing instruction for each version          and existing instruction for each topic
           6. Revise and elaborate the instruction and        6. Revise and elaborate the instruction and
              assessments for each version                       assessments for each topic
           7. Formatively evaluate the ADE document           7. Formatively evaluate the ADE document
           8. Begin developing the implementation plan,       8. Begin developing the implementation plan,
              and update the project management plan             and update the project management plan
   Ch. 8   Detailed guidance is provided for Lower-Level Step 6: Revise and Elaborate the Instruction and
           Assessments for Each Version/Topic. It includes instructional strategies for:
             • Remembering information
             • Understanding relationships
             • Applying skills and higher-order skills
             • Acting on attitudes or values


 1. Have each team prepare a mid-level ADE document for their project. Given the
    intentionally narrow scope of each project, this, too, will likely be a very small ADE
    document. We expect that for a project in a one-semester course, one to three ver-
    sions of one task or one to three applications of one topic – depending on the size of
    the task or topic – will be a reasonable scope. For what you consider to be the best
    ADE documents, we suggest you get written permission from the students to use
    them as examples in the next offering of your course.
 2. Have each team offer suggestions for improvement for the ADE document of one or
    two other teams before you review and provide feedback to the students.
114 Mid-Level ADE
 3. Have a whole-class, synchronous discussion of the strengths and weaknesses of this
    mid-level ADE process, including any difficulties or challenges they faced during the
    process and what changes to the process might have helped. We would love to get
    your suggestions for improvement.

References
Anderson, R.C., Osborn, J., & Tierney, R.J. (1984). Learning to read in American schools: Basal readers and content
   texts. East Sussex, United Kingdom: Psychology Press.
Bailey, R. (2019). Biology: The study of life. Retrieved from https://www.thoughtco.com/biology-meaning
   -373266.
Beissner, K.L., & Reigeluth, C.M. (1987). A case study on course sequencing with multiple strands using the
   elaboration theory. Performance Improvement Quarterly, 7(2), 38–61. doi:10.1111/J.1937-8327.1994.TB00624.X.
Bunderson, C.V., Gibbons, A.S., Olsen, J.B., & Kearsley, G.P. (1981). Work models: Beyond instructional
   objectives. Instructional Science, 10(3), 205–215.
Cohen, A.S., & Wollack, J.A. (2013). Handbook on test development: Helpful tips for creating reliable and valid
   classroom tests. Retrieved from http://testing.wisc.edu/Handbook%20on%20Test%20Construction.pdf.
Cronbach, L.J. (1970). Essentials of psychological testing (3rd ed.). New York, NY: Harper & Row.
Cronbach, L.J., & Meehl, P.E. (1955). Construct validity for psychological tests. Psychological Bulletin, 52(4),
   281–302.
Hartley, J., & Davies, I.K. (1976). Preinstructional strategies: The role of pretests, behavioral objectives,
   overviews and advance organizers. Review of Educational Research, 46(2), 239–265.
Mager, R. (1975). Preparing instructional objectives (2nd ed.). Belmont, CA: Fearon-Pitman Publishers, Inc.
Mager, R. (1997). Measuring instructional results, or, got a match?: How to find out if your instructional objectives have been
   achieved (3rd ed.). Atlanta, GA: Center for Effective Performance.
Reigeluth, C.M. (1992). Elaborating the elaboration theory. Educational Technology, Research and Development,
   40(3), 80–86. doi:10.1007/BF02296844.
Reigeluth, C.M. (1999). The elaboration theory: Guidance for scope and sequence decisions. In C.M. Reigeluth
   (Ed.), Instructional-design theories and models: A new paradigm of instructional theory (Vol. II, pp. 425–453). Mahwah,
   NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Reigeluth, C.M. (2007). Order, first step to mastery: An introduction to sequencing in instructional design. In
   F. Ritter, J. Nerb, E. Lehtinen & T. O’Shea (Eds.), In order to learn, How the sequence of topics influences learning
   (pp. 19–40). New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Reigeluth, C.M., & Rodgers, C.A. (1980). The elaboration theory of instruction: Prescriptions for task analysis
   and design. NSPI Journal, 19(1), 16–26.
Romiszowski, A. J. (1988). The selection and use of instructional media: For improved classroom teaching and for interactive,
   individualized instruction (2 ed.). New York: Nichols Pub.
Schank, R.C., Berman, T.R., & Macpherson, K.A. (1999). Learning by doing. In C.M. Reigeluth (Ed.),
   Instructional-design theories and models: A new paradigm of instructional theory (Vol. II). Mahway, NJ: Lawrence
   Erlbaum Associates.
Schank, R.C., Fano, A., Jona, M., & Bell, B. (1993). The design of goal-based scenarios. Evanston, IL: Northwestern
   University Press.
Shrock, S.A., & Coscarelli, W.C. (2007). Criterion-referenced test development: Technical and legal guidelines for corporate
   training (3rd ed.). San Francisco, CA: Pfeiffer.
West, L.H., & Kellett, N.C. (1981). The meaningful learning of intellectual skills: An application of Ausubel’s
   subsumption theory to the domain of intellectual skills learning. Science Education, 65(2), 207–219.
Widmayer, S.A. (2004). Schema theory: An introduction. Retrieved June 22, 2020 from https://pdfs.semanti
   cscholar.org/47b1/5487db915f62aec7a1f57c6f64c0c1c5234f.pdf.
7       Lower-Level Analysis,
        Design, and Evaluation




Overview
Having made mid-level design decisions, you have a clearer vision within which to make
more detailed design decisions about what to teach and how to teach it for each task or
topic you listed. These decisions are shown in Table 7.1.
   Again, you must analyze the content to make good decisions about both what to teach
and how to teach it. And you must formatively evaluate the design decisions you make.
Before we proceed, it is helpful to understand the distinction between “organizing con-
tent” and “supporting content.”
   Organizing and supporting content. Organizing content comprises the basic
sequence or structure for teaching a task or topic, somewhat like the skeleton of a body.
And we refer to the other kinds of content as “supporting content” because they are
plugged into that basic sequence (structure) just in time for when they are helpful to the
learner, somewhat like flesh on a skeleton. Kinds of supporting content include informa-
tion, understandings, skills (including higher-order skills), and attitudes, each of which
requires different methods of instruction (see “Categories of Learning” in Chapter 3).
Examples of organizing content and supporting content are shown in Table 7.2. Therefore,
the major parts of lower-level design include (1) selecting and sequencing all the organizing and
supporting content and (2) determining what kind of learning each entails so that the most
effective learner objectives, instruction, and assessment can be designed.

1. Select and Sequence the Organizing Content
Guidance for selecting and sequencing the organizing content is different for:

A. Task expertise and
B. Topic expertise.

1A. For Task Expertise: Select and Sequence the Organizing Content
1A.1. Decide on the Kind of Organizing Content – Procedural or Heuristic – for a Version
First, pick a version of a task from your mid-level analysis, design, and evaluation (ADE)
document and consult with subject matter experts (SMEs) to determine the extent to which it
is procedural versus heuristic. Some tasks are highly procedural, meaning that experts mainly
think in terms of steps as they perform the task. On the opposite extreme are tasks that are
highly heuristic, meaning that experts think in terms of principles, rules of thumb, guidelines,
causal models, and such, rather than steps. Most tasks are intermediate points along that
continuum. The more heuristic a task is, the more complex it is. Complex cognitive skills fall
116 Lower-Level ADE

Table 7.1 Lower-Level Analysis and Design Processes for Task and Topic Expertise

A. Task Expertise                                           B. Topic Expertise
1A. Select and sequence the organizing content for           1B. Select and sequence the organizing
    each version of the task                                      content for each topic
    1A.1. Decide on the kind of organizing content:              1B.1. Decide on the kind of organizing
        procedural or heuristic                                       content: conceptual or theoretical
    1A.2. Analyze the version of the task and sequence its       1B.2. Analyze the topic and sequence its
        organizing content                                            organizing content
2. Select and classify the supporting content for each version or topic
   • Identify all the supporting content down to entry level, and note the kind of learning and criteria
     for mastery for each
3. Sequence the supporting content for each version or topic
   3.1. Add the supporting content to your sequence of organizing content
   3.2. Adjust the size of the learning session
4. Formatively evaluate and document the findings
   • See Chapter 10
5. Identify resource requirements, availability, and existing instruction for each version or topic
   5.1. Estimate resource requirements for implementing the instruction
   5.2. Estimate resource requirements for the ID project
6. Revise and elaborate the instruction, media, and assessments for each version or topic
   6.1. Select appropriate instructional formats and tailor media selections to each
   6.2. Design the scaffolding: coaching and instructing and tailor media selections to each
   6.3. Design the motivational support
   6.4. Design the assessments
7. Formatively evaluate the ADE document
   • See Chapter 10
8. Begin developing the implementation plan, and update the project management plan
   • See Chapter 11




far to the heuristic side. Over the past 50 years as society has become ever more complex,
tasks in general have fewer procedural elements and more heuristic elements, resulting in a
distribution of tasks increasingly skewed to the heuristic side of the continuum.
   This distinction is an extremely important one, because instructional designers in the
past have often tried to teach heuristic tasks as if they were procedural, teaching steps and
overlooking heuristics. The results have been disappointing. The bottom line is that tasks
must be analyzed to identify and select both procedural and heuristic content for instruc-
tion, and the best methods of instruction differ somewhat for the two kinds of content.
Note the task, version, and mix of procedural and heuristic elements in your lower-level
ADE document (see Table 7.6 for a sample template).

1A.2. Analyze the Version of the Task and Sequence Its Organizing Content
Next, you should analyze the version of the task (its procedural and heuristic elements) to
identify what needs to be learned to become an expert in the task. There are two kinds of
procedural tasks that are analyzed a bit differently: linear and branching. Linear procedures
are ones that have a single sequence of steps that are always performed in a set order, and
                                                                                     Lower-Level ADE 117

Table 7.2 Examples of Organizing and Supporting Content

Examples of Organizing Content                          Examples of Related Supporting Content
Procedural Organizing Content                           Concepts: folders, preferences, input devices
Steps involved in installing software on a new          Principles: effects of different settings on
   computer                                                preferences, causes of installation problems and
                                                           their solutions
Heuristic Organizing Content                            Concepts: kinds of interpersonal conflicts, kinds of
Heuristics, principles, and causal models involved in      project management tools (e.g., Gantt chart)
  managing a project                                    Principles: causes of interpersonal conflicts, effects
                                                           of different management styles
Conceptual Organizing Content                           Concepts: parts of flowering plants, circulatory
Kinds of life                                              system
• Kinds of plants                                       Procedures: steps for identifying oak trees in
  ο Kinds of trees                                         winter, steps for dissecting a frog
  ο …                                                   Principles: process of reproduction in flowering
• Kinds of animals                                         plants, causes of genetic variations
  ο Kinds of mammals
  ο …

Theoretical Organizing Content                          Concepts: competitive advantage, niche, kinds of
Principles and natural processes related to survival of    genetic variations
   the fittest                                          Procedure: how to count animal populations in the
• Principles and processes related to natural selection    wild
• Principles and processes related to genetic variation




Table 7.3 Examples of Procedural and Heuristic Tasks

Procedural Tasks                                        Heuristic Tasks
Installing software on a new computer                   Managing a project
Solving mathematical equations with two unknowns        Diagnosing cognitive disorders in early childhood


the output of one step is the input for the next step (see Table 7.4). It is rare for a task to
be a linear procedure. Branching procedures are ones in which different “action steps” are per-
formed under different circumstances, but experts still think in terms of steps rather than
heuristics. The different circumstances are indicated in a flowchart by “decision steps,”
where each choice in that decision leads to a different “branch” of the flowchart (see
Figure 7.1). Hence, branching procedures are more complex and more difficult to analyze
but should not be confused with heuristic tasks.
   Analyze linear procedural tasks. If the version of the procedural task is linear, per-
form a procedural task analysis (Merrill, 1976) of the version to identify its steps and con-
duct the first part of a hierarchical task analysis (Gagné, 1968) to break the steps down
into sub-steps until the entry level of description of steps is reached. To identify the steps
for the task and the entry level of the target learners, it helps to consult an experienced
instructor or two – experienced in both the task and teaching it to the target learners.
Then, design a procedural sequence by planning to teach the steps in the same order as
they are performed.
118 Lower-Level ADE

Table 7.4 Example of a Linear Procedure

How to Make Banana Bread
 1.   Preheat the oven to 350°F.
 2.   In a mixing bowl, mash the ripe bananas with a fork until completely smooth.
 3.   Stir the melted butter into the mashed bananas.
 4.   Mix in the baking soda and salt.
 5.   Stir in the sugar, beaten egg, and vanilla extract.
 6.   Mix in the flour.
 7.   Pour the batter into your prepared loaf pan.
 8.   Bake for 50 minutes to 1 hour at 350°F.
 9.   Remove from oven and let cool in the pan for a few minutes.
10.   Remove the banana bread from the pan and let cool completely before serving.
11.   Slice and serve.




         Start



        Welcome
         patient



       Registered   Yes      Available       Yes    Record health
        patient?              nurse?                  condition

             No                    No

        Register              Wait for                Available       Yes   Assign patient
        patient            available nurse             doctor?                to doctor

                                                              No
                                                       Wait for                 Need         Yes     Arrange
                                                   available doctor          follow-up?            appointment

                                                                                    No


                                                                               Need          Yes   Give patient
                                                                             medication?           prescription

                                                                                    No


                                                                               Dismiss
                                                                               patient



                                                                                Start



Figure 7.1 Example of a Branching Procedure for a Patient Visit to a Doctor.
                                                                         Lower-Level ADE 119
   Analyze branching procedural tasks. If the version of the procedural task has deci-
sion steps and branches, your analysis should result in a flowchart for this version of the
task (see Figure 7.1 for an example). Note which steps should be performed sequentially
and which can be performed independently of each other. Then design a sequence that
teaches the shortest path through the flowchart first, followed by progressively longer
paths. You should already have noted the condition(s) under which the version should be
performed, such as tools, equipment, and materials required to perform the version of the
task, and the standards of performance that should be achieved. Designing the sequence
while the analysis is conducted is usually most efficient.
   Analyze heuristic tasks. For heuristic tasks, we recommend the following heuristic task
analysis procedure (Lee & Reigeluth, 2003; Lee & Reigeluth, 2009) for each version of the
task (see examples in Table 7.5 below). Due to the complexity of heuristic tasks, the fol-
lowing are all usually important for the learners to learn.

 1. Identify the goals for this version of the task under its conditions.
 2. Identify all the important considerations for attaining each goal. Considerations are
    the major categories of causal factors that influence performance of the task. If there
    are more than about seven causal factors for a consideration, it is useful to identify
    sub-considerations for it.
 3. Identify all the important causal factors for each consideration (or sub-considera-
    tion). A causal factor is something immaterial (as a circumstance or influence) that
    contributes to producing a result.
 4. Analyze each causal factor to identify all guidelines (prescriptive principles) that an
    expert uses to account for this consideration.
 5. Identify any decision rules an expert uses to combine the guidelines into a performance
    model. (See part of an example in Figure 7.2.) In some cases, these may be obvious
    enough that they do not need to be taught.
 6. Identify explanations as to why each of the guidelines works and combine the expla-
    nations into explanatory models. (See partial example in Figure 7.3.) While not always
    necessary, explanatory models may provide a depth of understanding that allows the
    learner to flexibly adapt and improvise when conditions change in the field.
 7. Identify a descriptive model for any and all objects involved in performing the task.
    (See partial example in Figure 7.4.) Similarly, while not always necessary, descriptive
    models provide a depth of understanding that allows the learner to flexibly adapt and
    improvise when conditions change in the field.

Plan to develop learners’ skills and understandings in the following sequence: goals, con-
siderations (and sub-considerations), descriptive models, causal factors, a performance
model (guidelines and decisions rules), and explanations (explanatory models). Sometimes
it is better to teach explanations with the guidelines, or even have the learners develop the
guidelines from the explanations.
    Analyze combination tasks. For combination tasks, do both procedural and heuristic
task analyses: first identify steps at a high level and any sub-steps that represent the way
experts think about the task; and then, for each step that experts don’t think about in terms
of sub-steps, identify guidelines and decision rules in a performance model, explanations
in explanatory models (if beneficial), and any relevant descriptive models.
    Record this organizing content and its sequence in your lower-level ADE document
(see Table 7.6 for a sample template). Also, you could conduct formative evaluation
(described in Step 4) on the results of this step now, but it is usually better to wait until you
120 Lower-Level ADE

Table 7.5 Guidance and Example of the Top-Down Approach to Heuristic Task Analysis

Process                              Example of a Task: Determine the Media for a Course
1. Identify the goals of this        The media will help the learner to master the objective, will be
    version of the task under its      cost effective, and will fall within the constraints for the course
    conditions.                        development and implementation.
2. Identify all important             The budget, skills of personnel available to teach the course, and
    considerations for attaining        availability of equipment for the course.
    each goal. (If there are
    lots of causal factors for a
    consideration, then it is helpful
    to also identify subcategories
    of considerations.)
3. Identify all the important        The numbers of equipment, scheduling of equipment, alternative uses
    causal factors for                 of equipment and capabilities of equipment.
    each consideration (or
    sub-consideration).
4. Analyze each causal factor        For all the above causal factors:
   to identify all guidelines        • If there is insufficient equipment available for the projected number
   an expert uses to act on            of learners, do not select that delivery system
   this consideration (or            • If the equipment is not available at all the necessary times, do not
   sub-consideration).                 select that delivery system
                                     • If the equipment is available and would otherwise go unutilized,
                                       there may be some pressure to select that delivery system
                                     • If the capabilities of the equipment do not meet the instructional
                                       requirements, do not select that delivery system
                                     Note: these examples are illustrative, not exhaustive, and there may be
                                       more than one guideline for a causal factor.
5. Identify any decision rules an First, think about the context for delivery of the instruction, and how
    expert uses to combine the       important digital media might be for that context. Then think about
    guidelines into a performance    what capabilities are most beneficial for the instructional requirements.
    model.                           Next, if digital media would be best, think about how expensive it
                                     would be to (a) use such media and (b) develop the instruction for
                                     such media. … (These are just a few of the decision rules.)
                                  A performance model is a flowchart of this thinking process (including both
                                     guidelines and decision rules). A partial performance model is shown
                                     in Figure 7.2.
6. Identify specific explanations • Shortage of equipment can increase time for learning and is
    as to why each of the           demotivating for learners
    guidelines works and combine • Inaccessibility to equipment when learners need it will increase time
    the explanations into           for learning and will be demotivating
    explanatory models.           • Underutilization of existing equipment is a waste of scarce resources
                                  • If the equipment does not possess the needed affordances for the
                                    instructional requirements, learning will be more difficult
                                  A partial explanatory model is shown in Figure 7.3.
7. Identify a descriptive model     There are no objects that one uses to select media for a course (tools),
    for tools and any other objects   but the learner may benefit from understanding each medium, such
    involved in performing the        as a mental model of networked computers as requiring electricity
    task.                             and Internet connection and having capabilities to show motion and
                                      provide interactivity. A descriptive model shows the parts of such
                                      objects and how they function. A partial descriptive model for a
                                      different task is shown in Figure 7.4.
                                                                                                Lower-Level ADE 121


                                                          Start



                                                     Assess wound



                                         Yes          Is it a clean,        No
                                                     minor wound?


                Has patient completed           No                     No         Has patient completed
                  a primary tetanus                                                 a primary tetanus
                  diphtheria series?                                                diphtheria series?

                        Yes                                                                     Yes


                                                                       Administer
      Was the most                      Administer                                                    Was the most
                              No                                      vaccine and         No
       recent dose                       vaccine                                                       recent dose
                                                                    tetanus immune
     within 10 years?                     today.                                                      within 5 years?
                                                                  globulin (TIG) now.

              Yes                                                                                             Yes
                                                          End



                                               Don’t administer vaccine.



                                                          End


Figure 7.2 Example of a Branching Procedure for Performing Tetanus Prophylaxis.



      Shortage of                         Increase in Time for
      Equipment                                Learning

                                                                                        Reduction in Learning

    Inaccessibility to                         Reduction in
       Equipment                                Motivation



   Equipment Lacks
  Needed Affordances


Figure 7.3 Part of an Explanatory Model.


have finished Steps 2 and 3 so that you can evaluate all the content and the entire sequence
at the same time.
    For a quantitative rapid prototype approach, when finished with the one task, proceed
to analyze the supporting content. Otherwise, do this for all tasks before proceeding to
analyze the supporting content.
122 Lower-Level ADE


                        S2               FUSE


                  S1                              S3                              S4
                                                       LIGHTS

                   IGN.                                                            FAN
                   COIL                                                           MOTOR



Figure 7.4 Partial Descriptive Model for Troubleshooting an Electronic Circuit.


1B. For Topic Expertise: Select and Sequence the Organizing Content
As you know, this book advocates not only a holistic approach to instructional design and
content analysis, but also a holistic approach to sequencing instruction. This approach is
in direct alignment with schema theory’s understanding that meaningful learning is assimi-
lated into a mental model, which provides a meaningful context for what is being learned.

1B.1. Decide on the Kind of Organizing Content – Conceptual or Theoretical – for a Topic
You must analyze the content to make good decisions about both what to teach and how to
teach it. Fundamental to this analysis are the two basic kinds of understanding you identified
in the mid-level topic analysis – conceptual (addressing “what” – objects, ideas, and events)
and theoretical (addressing “why” – causes and effects). Remember that for task expertise,
each version of the task has a considerable amount of different organizing content – different
steps for a branching procedural task and different heuristics for a heuristic task. In contrast,
for topic expertise, each application of the topic typically uses mostly the same principles or
concepts, but in different ways and for different purposes. Consequently, you should ana-
lyze the organizing content for a whole topic (whereas for task expertise, you analyze the
organizing content for each individual version of a task rather than for the task as a whole),
though you may identify some small differences among applications of a topic later.
    First, pick a topic from your mid-level ADE document, and note whether you had
identified it as primarily conceptual or theoretical (see Table 7.7 for an example of each).
Whichever is primary, that is the organizing content for that topic and its applications.
If both are equally important, you can design a sequence of the organizing content for
each (conceptual and theoretical) in the next step (Step 1B.2) and then integrate the two
sequences. If it seems that the topic will be too large, break it into two or more subtopics
now and decide on the kind of organizing content for each (conceptual or theoretical).
Note the topic, its applications, and kind of organizing content in your lower-level ADE
document (see Table 7.9 for a sample template).

1B.2. Analyze the Topic and Sequence Its Organizing Content
FIRST, ANALYZE, SELECT, AND GROUP THE ORGANIZING CONTENT

Based on the kind of organizing content (conceptual or theoretical), do one of the following
two kinds of lower-level topic analysis for each topic: conceptual analysis or theoretical analysis.
   Conceptual: analyze, select, and group the conceptual organizing content. When
the focus of a topic is on conceptual understanding, its organizing content (concepts) can
be identified by asking SMEs (preferably two or more, because they usually have different
                                                                                Lower-Level ADE 123

Table 7.6 Template for a Lower-Level ADE Document for Task Expertise (Use for Each Version of Each Topic)




Table 7.7 Example of the Two Kinds of Understanding for Organizing Content for the Economics Topic “the
          Law of Supply and Demand”

Conceptual Understanding                   Theoretical Understanding
What is “supply”?                          What is “the law of supply and demand”? (causal understanding)
What is “demand”?                          What are the stages of the economic cycle? (natural process
What are the different kinds of markets?     understanding)
124 Lower-Level ADE

        Table 7.8 Examples of a Domain, Subjects, and Topics for Conceptual Organizing Content

        Level of Analysis                 Description of Content
        Domain                            Economics
        Subjects for Economics            Microeconomics (see topics below)
                                          Macroeconomics
                                          International economics
                                          Development economics
        Topics for Microeconomics         Supply and demand
                                          Markets (see concepts below)
                                          Production, cost, and efficiency
                                          Specialization
                                          Firms
        Concepts for Markets              Perfect competition
                                          Monopoly
                                          Oligopoly




Figure 7.5 Graphic Representation of Organizing Content.

perspectives and biases) what are its parts or what are its kinds that should be taught
(Reigeluth & Darwazeh, 1982). For example, if communication is the topic, the designer
might ask what the major different kinds of communication are that should be taught,
such as oral, written, and visual. Then think about the sub-kinds of each of those kinds
that are important to teach (e.g., oral = conversation and presentation; written = informal
and formal). Keep in mind that any given concept can have different ways of thinking
about its kinds. For example, written communication could be thought of as informal
and formal, or fiction and nonfiction, or books, essays, and letters, and much more. You
need to decide which option of kinds is important given your goals, and often more than
one option is important. Figure 7.5 shows part of the conceptual organizing content for a
course on biology (from Table 6.7 in Chapter 6).
   At some point, you might find that parts become important, so you could ask what the
major parts of a presentation are and so forth. Continue the process of identifying kinds
and parts until all the important concepts for this topic have been identified down to the
desired level of detail for the target learners (see Table 7.8). It helps to review each of the
applications you listed in your mid-level ADE document to make sure you identify all the
important organizing content for the topic. You may find that some organizing content is
not relevant to some applications. You should note those irrelevancies because they will
influence your sequence of applications.
   Enter your list of concepts in your lower-level ADE document for topic expertise (see
Table 7.9 for a sample template). You should organize your list into groups of concepts
that should be taught together, indicating any applications for which any organizing con-
tent is irrelevant. Based on this analysis, you may want to make some adjustments to the
sequence of applications in your mid-level ADE document. Also, try to estimate whether
each application will be of appropriate size (scope, amount of learning time) for the target
                                                                            Lower-Level ADE 125

Table 7.9 Template for a Lower-Level ADE Document for Topic Expertise (Use for Each Topic)




learners after all supporting content is added (in Step 2). Size should depend on such fac-
tors as the age of the learners, the difficulty of the content for the learners, and the level
of motivation of the learners for learning the content. The bottom line, as Bruner (1966)
explained it for what he called a “learning episode,” is that the payoff the learners get from
mastering the content of the episode must be greater than the “cost” for the learners to
master it. If it looks like an application may be too large or small, try to make adjustments
now, but you will have further opportunity to make adjustments when you allocate sup-
porting content to the sequence of organizing content and applications.
   Theoretical: analyze, select, and group the theoretical organizing content. When
the focus of a topic is on theoretical understanding, its organizing content (causal princi-
ples and/or natural processes) can be identified by asking SMEs what are the major causal
126 Lower-Level ADE

Table 7.10 Some of the Organizing Content for the Topic “Supply and Demand”
Subtopic (principle): Law of demand
Price and quantity demanded in a given market are inversely related.
     Sub-subtopic (principle): Utility maximization
     Utility (buyer satisfaction) is maximized when marginal benefit equals marginal cost.
Subtopic (principle): Law of supply
Price and quantity supplied in a given market are directly related.
     Sub-subtopic (principle): Profit maximization
     Profits are maximized when marginal revenues equal marginal costs.
Subtopic (principle): Market equilibrium
The market will seek an equilibrium price at which quantity supplied equals quantity demanded.



relationships and/or natural processes involved in it (Reigeluth, 1987, 2007). For example,
Table 7.10 shows the major organizing content for the topic “supply and demand” (domain:
economics; subject: microeconomics). Then ask what additional principles elaborate on each
of these fundamental principles (major causal relationships) and are also important to teach,
given the applications you selected for this topic in your mid-level analysis. Such additional
principles might address a single concept in the major principle, like the principle of profit
maximization for “quantity supplied” in the law of supply (see Table 7.10). And you might
look for principles that deal with narrower situations, like those related to a shift in the
demand curve (e.g., from an increase in buyers’ incomes), a shift in the supply curve (from a
change in production costs), or supply and demand under imperfect competition (monopo-
lies and oligopolies). Continue this analysis and selection until you have identified all the
principles (often in combinations as causal models) that should be taught, down to the
desired level of detail or complexity (based on the applications you selected for this topic).
    But not all theoretical understanding is causal; some entails understanding a natural pro-
cess, which is distinct from a process that is consciously performed by humans (called a proce-
dure to avoid confusion). For example, if the subtopic is learning (domain: psychology; topic:
cognitive development), information processing theory states that selective perception of stimuli is
naturally followed by passing them on to sensory memory, where processes of attention and
pattern recognition automatically pass them on to short-term memory (or working memory),
where rehearsal and encoding processes then pass them on to long-term memory. This pro-
cess is naturally occurring (not performed consciously) and therefore is not a procedure.
    To identify phases in a natural process, ask your SMEs “what happens after this?” or
what happens before this?” until you have identified all the phases in the process. Then
ask if each phase should be further analyzed into sub-processes, given the applications
you identified for this topic. Continue this analysis until you have identified all the natural
processes that should be taught and have analyzed the parts of each natural process down
to the level of detail appropriate for the applications of this topic.
    Enter all the principles and/or processes into your lower-level ADE document for topic
expertise (see Table 7.9 for a sample template). You should organize your list into groups
that should be taught together, such as causal models (for principles) and process models (for
processes). Indicate any applications for which any organizing content is irrelevant. Based on
this analysis, you may want to make some adjustments to the sequence of applications in your
mid-level ADE document. Also, try to estimate whether each application will be of appropri-
ate size (scope, amount of learning time) for the target learners (as you did for the conceptual
organizing content, understanding that supporting content will be added shortly – in Step 2).
Size should depend on such factors as the age of the learners, the difficulty of the content for
                                                                          Lower-Level ADE 127
the learners, and the level of motivation of the learners for learning the content. The bottom
line, as Bruner (1966) explained it for what he called a “learning episode,” is that the payoff
the learners get from mastering the content of the episode must be greater than the “cost” for
the learners to master it. If it looks like an application may be too large or small, try to make
adjustments now, but you will have further opportunity to make adjustments when you allo-
cate supporting content to the sequence of organizing content and applications.
SECOND, SEQUENCE THE ORGANIZING CONTENT

Again, the lower-level analysis and design is a bit different for conceptual, theoretical, and
hybrid topics, so choose one of the following three approaches.
    Conceptual: sequence the conceptual organizing content. A general-to-detailed
sequence provides a meaningful context for assimilating new concepts into a stable schema
(Ausubel, 1968; Reigeluth, 1987, 1999, 2007; Reigeluth & Darwazeh, 1982). Typically, the
order in which you identified the concepts is a good general-to-detailed sequence for teach-
ing conceptual organizing content. However, concepts usually have branching relationships
(parts or kinds) whereby several concepts could be learned immediately after a higher-level
(broader, more inclusive) concept has been learned. When feasible (e.g., for online instruction),
arrange your groups of concepts in a branching pattern that allows learners to choose the order
of those groups (to promote learner control and self-directed learning, which enhances moti-
vation) – for this takes little extra effort for you to do. You can number the groups for a linear
sequence or put the numbers in a tree diagram for a branching (learner-controlled) sequence.
    Theoretical: sequence the theoretical organizing content. Typically, the principles and
processes/phases identified first during your analysis are the simplest ones, and the later ones
tend to be more complex. So, the order in which you identified them is typically a good simple-
to-complex sequence that provides a meaningful context for learning each subsequent one.
Another method for sequencing theoretical organizing content is to use the order in which
they were discovered in history. That tends to be a progression from broader, more inclusive
principles (which are also simpler and more fundamental) to narrower, more detailed princi-
ples. When feasible (e.g., for online instruction), arrange your groups of principles in a branch-
ing (rather than linear) sequence that allows learners to choose the order of those groups
(within the constraints of broader understandings before narrower ones and prerequisites
first) – for this takes little extra effort for you to do. You can number the groups for a linear
sequence or put the numbers in a tree diagram for a branching (learner-controlled) sequence.
    Hybrid: combine multiple sequences. The third option is to consider the possibility
of creating and combining separate general-to-detailed sequences for conceptual-parts,
conceptual-kinds, theoretical-causal, and/or theoretical-process organizing content into
a single comprehensive sequence, called a multi-strand sequence (Beissner & Reigeluth,
1994). Each sequence needs to be adjusted in order to merge with the others. Consult your
SMEs for deciding on those adjustments.
    Learner control: branching, learner-controlled sequences. For all three options, if you
are designing online instruction, you could design a branching sequence of organizing content
so that learners could choose which branch to pursue at any given time, based on their interests.
    Record this organizing content and its sequence in your lower-level ADE document (see
Table 7.9 for a sample template). Also, you could conduct formative evaluation (described in
Step 4) on the results of this step now, but it is usually better to wait until you have finished
Steps 2 and 3 so that you can evaluate all the content and the entire sequence at the same
time.
    If you are using a quantitative approach to rapid prototyping, then when this step is
done for one topic (or even one subtopic, depending on scope), proceed to the next step.
Otherwise, perform this step for all your topics, and then continue.
128 Lower-Level ADE
2. Select and Classify the Supporting Content for Each Task or Topic
This guidance is the same for task expertise as for topic expertise.
   Now that the “skeleton” of the instruction (sequence of the organizing content) has
been designed for each version of the task, the next step is to select and classify the sup-
porting content for each version of the task or for each topic. This is often called a learning
analysis – an analysis that identifies all the supporting content down to what the learner
already knows, and classifies each as to type of learning in order to identify the best
sequence and instructional methods for each.

Identify All Important Supporting Content Down to Entry Level, and
Note the Kind of Learning and Criteria for Mastery for Each
Identify all the supporting content that is directly relevant to each part of the organizing
content and has not yet been acquired by the target learners. (Content already acquired by
the learners is called entry knowledge.) To simultaneously identify the supporting content and
the entry knowledge of the target learners, it helps to consult an experienced instructor or
two – experienced in both the content and teaching it to the target learners. This preliminary
assessment of entry knowledge can be confirmed later in a formal target learner analysis.
   During this process, note the kind of learning for each piece of supporting content
identified, for these are important for deciding which instructional strategies to use for each:
•   Memorize information (facts)
•   Understand relationships (conceptual and theoretical)
•   Apply skills (concept-classification, procedure-using, principle-using, and higher-
    order skills)
•   Act on attitudes and values

These kinds of learning are addressed in some detail in Chapter 8. Also, note the criteria
for mastery for each piece of supporting content, for these are also important for design-
ing the instruction. On this level, it is usually not necessary to note the conditions of per-
formance, for they tend to be the same as for the related organizing content.
   Analyze each of those supporting understandings, skills, and affective qualities1 down to
the level of entry knowledge (a learning prerequisite analysis), and enter the results in your
expanded ADE document (see Table 7.11 for a sample template). For skills, the procedural
and hierarchical task analysis approaches work well (Gagné, 1968, 1985). For understandings,
the hierarchical approach can be fairly easily modified to identify prerequisite understand-
ings, which are typically broader, more inclusive understandings that serve as meaning-
ful context for subsequent understandings (consistent with schema theory). For attitudes,
identify the affective, cognitive, and psychomotor components of each attitude (Kamradt
& Kamradt, 1999). During this process, note the kind of learning and the indicators of
mastery for each prerequisite or component part. See Table 7.12 for an example for a topic.
   When this is done, you have identified all the content that should be taught for this
topic or version of the task – both organizing and supporting content. Now you need to
sequence it. You could conduct formative evaluation (described in Step 4) on the results
of this step now, but it is usually better to wait until you have finished Step 3, Sequence the
Supporting Content for Each Version or Topic, so that you can evaluate all the content
and the entire sequence at the same time.


1   Facts are not included because they do not have prerequisites.
                                                                            Lower-Level ADE 129

Table 7.11 Additional Template for the Supporting Content in a Lower-Level ADE Document (Use for Each
           Version or Topic)




3. Sequence the Supporting Content for Each Version or Topic
This guidance is partially the same for both task and topic expertise.

3.1. Add the Supporting Content to Your Sequence of Organizing Content
For all the supporting content you have just analyzed (information, understandings, skills,
and attitudes), use the following principles to plug that content into your sequence of
130 Lower-Level ADE

Table 7.12 An Example of Supporting Content, Type of Learning, and Indicator of Mastery for a Topic

Organizing Content Supporting Content    Type of Learning       Criteria of Mastery
Law of Demand Quantity demanded          Understand Concept     Paraphrase the definition, give examples
              Substitution effect        Understand Principle   Predict, explain
              Purchasing power           Understand Concept     Paraphrase the definition
              Marginal utility           Understand Principle   Predict, explain
              Utility maximization       Understand Principle   Predict, explain
              Perfect competition        Understand Concept     Paraphrase the definition
              Imperfect competition      Understand Concept     Paraphrase the definition, give examples
              Imperfect competition      Understand Principle   Predict, explain
              Shift in demand curve      Understand Concept     Paraphrase the definition, give examples
              Shift in demand curve      Understand Principle   Predict, explain
              Elasticity of demand       Understand Concept     Paraphrase the definition, give examples


organizing content. Keep in mind that these are principles that you should try to imple-
ment in combination with each other, as appropriate.
    Just-in-time. Sequence the supporting content so it is taught just before it is needed or
helpful for learning a piece of the organizing content.
    Procedural order. Sequence any procedural supporting content in the order in which
it is used (i.e., a procedural sequence) (Merrill, 1976, 1978).
    Prerequisites first. Plan to teach prerequisites just in time before the content for which
they are prerequisite. Prerequisites for a skill are sub-skills that are simpler components
of the skill. Gagné (1968, 1985) noted that discriminations are prerequisites for concrete
concepts, which are prerequisites for defined concepts, which are prerequisites for rules,
which are prerequisites for higher-order rules (see Figure 7.6). But defined concepts can
also be prerequisites for other defined concepts, rules (procedures and principles) can be
prerequisites for other rules, and higher-order rules can be prerequisites for other higher-
order rules. Prerequisites for an understanding (conceptual or theoretical relationships)
are other understandings that enable learning it. They are relationships within a schema.
Prerequisites for an attitude include the affective component, the cognitive component,
and the psycho-motor component of the attitude.
    Understanding first. Plan to teach understanding (principles, causal models, or pro-
cess models) prior to a related procedure (Mayer, 1976).
    Coordinate concepts together. Plan to teach coordinate concepts together (M.D.
Merrill, Tennyson, & Posey, 1992). Coordinate concepts are those which are subordinate
to the same concept. For example, perfect competition and imperfect competition are
coordinate concepts because they are both kinds of markets (their superordinate con-
cept). Teaching them together helps learners hone in on the differences between the two,
because examples of each are nonexamples of the other.

3.2. Adjust the Size of the Learning Session
When you have designed the sequence, you should adjust the size of each learning ses-
sion in that sequence. Start by deciding how long a single learning session (or what
Bruner, 1966, called a learning episode) should be. Too short breaks up the instruction.
Too long exhausts the learner. Then, estimate how long it will take the target learners to
learn each learning session for this topic or version of the task with all its organizing and
supporting content. If it exceeds your range for size of learning session, you have three
                                                                        Lower-Level ADE 131


    Higher-order rules           Defined concepts


           Rules                 Defined concepts


     Defined concepts                   Rules


    Concrete concepts                   Rules


      Discriminations           Higher-order rules


                                Higher-order rules


Figure 7.6 Prerequisites for a skill.


choices to adjust its size – choices that are a bit different for a version of a task than for a
topic.

3.2A. For a Version of a Task
If the learning session is too large:

 1. You may be able to reduce its size by adding another simplifying condition. It is pos-
    sible to create simplifying conditions that don't exist in the real world, if necessary.
    While there are obvious disadvantages in doing so, it is often possible to compensate
    for them (e.g., by warning the learner about what is unrealistic or using extrinsic moti-
    vators, if needed).
 2. You could reduce the number of variations that this learning session will address and
    add them to a subsequent learning session.
 3. Some supporting content could be moved to a different learning session (whatever
    such content seems least helpful in learning the organizing content in this learning
    session), but don't remove any prerequisites for the organizing content.

On the other hand, if the learning session is too short, you might increase its size by
removing another simplifying condition or adding supporting content that you were not
able to include in an earlier learning session.

3.2B. For a Topic
If the learning session is too large:

 1. You could reduce its size by dividing the topic vertically – that is, putting half the sub-
    topics (with their respective sub-subtopics, etc.) in one learning session and the other
    half in another.
132 Lower-Level ADE
 2. You could reduce its size by dividing the topic horizontally – that is, by putting higher-
    level subtopics in one learning session and lower-level ones (e.g., sub-sub-subtopics)
    in the other.
 3. You could remove some supporting content from the learning session (and put it in
    another learning session), but don't remove any prerequisites for the organizing content.

On the other hand, if the learning session is too short (e.g., it breaks up the flow for the
learner), you might increase its size by adding another topic or adding supporting content
that you had to remove from an earlier learning session.
   But different learners may benefit from different sized learning sessions. When your
budget allows, you could design personalized, digital instruction to either permit the
learner to adjust the size of the learning session, or automatically adjust the size of the
learning session to the learner based on the learner’s prior performance. This requires
that you design a computer system to allow selection of different designs or to design the
instruction for each learner in real time, which will not be feasible for most ID projects.

4. Formatively Evaluate and Document the Findings
This guidance is the same for both task and topic expertise.
   Your formative evaluation still cannot involve tryouts with learners because the design
decisions are still too general. So, among the options described in Chapter 10 (Formative
Evaluation), you should still just conduct an expert review of the results of Steps 1–3 with
both content experts and instructional experts (preferably people who are experts in both
the content and teaching it to your target learners) by means of a walk-through exercise.
Review and evaluate the selection and sequence of organizing content (from Step 1) and
the selection (from Step 2) and sequence (from Step 3) of the supporting content with
the SMEs to enhance appropriateness, accuracy, effectiveness, and appeal. You could also
review them with learners who have just finished learning this content, as well as with other
stakeholders. Refer to your evaluation plan for the project and Chapter 10 for guidance.

5. Identify Resource Requirements, Availability, and
   Existing Instruction for Each Version or Topic
This guidance is the same for both task and topic expertise. However, the choice of
instructional methods (in Step 6) will impact the decisions in this step, and vice versa, so
these two steps should be done simultaneously.
   Now that there is more information about the instruction, revisit the resource require-
ments and availability for each version or topic.

5.1. Estimate Resource Requirements for Implementing the Instruction
Estimate the resource requirements for implementing the instruction and compare that
with the available resources (probably different from the resources for your ID project).
If they are insufficient, revise the content and/or methods selected at this point, or con-
tact the client to obtain additional resources to meet the requirements, or in some cases
a workaround may be needed to support the instructional needs with available resources.

5.2. Estimate Resource Requirements for the ID Project
Estimate the resource requirements for designing and developing the instruction and
compare that with the available resources. Also, identify any existing instruction that
fits the designer objectives (content and methods selected), and assess the extent to which
                                                                                        Lower-Level ADE 133

       Table 7.13 Form for Review of Existing Materials

        Question                                                                           Yes   No
        Does the material meet the requirements of the objective(s)?
        Is the level of learning appropriate (e.g., memorization, application, etc.)?
        Is the material accurate?
        Does the material address motivational factors?
        Can the material be properly sequenced?
        Does the material provide sufficient guidance?
        Are sufficient practice exercises provided?
        Are the learner assessments adequate?
        Is the material proprietary or copyrighted? If so, can you get the rights?



it could be adopted, adapted, and/or extended to teach the organizing and/or support-
ing content, given the methods that have been selected so far in the mid- and lower-level
designs. Even the use of some portions of existing materials may be economically advan-
tageous. Reusing or revising existing instruction can save time and money and free up
personnel resources to complete other tasks. Existing materials could be from textbooks,
publications, handbooks, videos, online instruction, and job aids or training materials.
    In order to select the appropriate existing materials, a deliberate and thorough
review of such materials should be conducted. After it has been determined what instruc-
tional materials are needed to support the designer objectives and they have been gathered
for review, the review process is ready to begin. Questions to keep in mind during the
review of existing materials are shown in Table 7.13.
    Revise the resource requirements based on your use of existing instruction. If they are
insufficient, rethink the content and/or methods selected at this point, or contact the
client to obtain additional resources to meet the requirements, or in some cases a worka-
round may be needed to support the instructional requirement with existing resources.


Copyright, Fair Use, and the Creative Commons
It is important to consider copyright issues when selecting or developing instructional materi-
als, especially online ones, since online materials are often more easily copied, edited, repro-
duced, and shared. Just because it is online does not mean you can use it without the permission
of the author or creator. Copyright law applies to intellectual property that is an original work
of authorship, including literacy and musical work. There are some exceptions and limitations
to copyright though. For example, works produced by federal employees in the course of
their employment (e.g., a food safety guide from the United States Department of Agriculture
– USDA) are in the public domain in the United States and not protected by copyright law.
Copyright is automatic in that it applies as soon as the original work has been created, as long
as it has a copyright notice. In the United States, copyright protection lasts for the life of the
author or an additional 70 or 100 years for an institutional author (Creative Commons USA,
n.d.). For information on getting permission to use copyrighted material, see Stim (2019).
    “Fair use” refers to the right to use portions of copyrighted materials without permis-
sion for certain types of uses – such as criticism, comment, news reporting, teaching,
scholarship, and research (US Copyright Office, 2019). The educational fair use guidelines
(see Stanford University Libraries, n.d.) apply to materials used for educational purposes in
educational institutions, such as K-12 schools, universities, libraries, and other nonprofit
institutions. “Educational purposes” include:
134 Lower-Level ADE
•   Noncommercial instruction or curriculum-based teaching by educators to learners at
    nonprofit educational institutions
•   Planned noncommercial study or investigation directed toward making a contribution
    to a field of knowledge
•   Presentation of research findings at noncommercial peer conferences, workshops, or
    seminars (Stim, 2019; US Copyright Office, 2019)

Many types of intellectual property, including research, music, books, and software, can be
openly licensed. With the Creative Commons, the global standard for sharing content for
use and re-use, one can easily get a free copyright license. By providing free, easy-to-use
copyright licenses, the Creative Commons aims to develop, support, and steward legal and
technical infrastructure that maximizes digital creativity, sharing, and innovation. Using
Creative Commons licensing is one way to protect intellectual property. For more infor-
mation, visit the Creative Commons website at creativecommons.org.
   Update the ADE document and ID Project Management Plan, if needed, based on the
outcome of this step.


6. Revise and Elaborate the Instruction, Media, and
   Assessments for Each Version or Topic
Based on the results of the analysis of organizing and supporting content, you should revise
and elaborate your instructional methods and media selections and further design instruc-
tion and assessments for the lower-level content, if needed. Additionally, you should select
the appropriate instructional formats (Step 6.1) and design the instructional scaffolds (Step
6.2) and motivational support (Step 6.3). However, the resources and existing instruction
(Step 5) will impact the decisions in this activity, and vice versa, so these two activities
should be done simultaneously.

6.1. Select Appropriate Instructional Formats and Tailor
     Media Selections to Each Format
As you elaborate learning-by-doing approaches and design instruction for each piece of
organizing and supporting content, a variety of instructional formats can be selected. The
most common formats are shown in Table 7.14. You may select different formats for dif-
ferent pieces of the organizing and supporting content. Different media are likely appro-
priate for different formats, so adjust your media selections accordingly.

6.2. Design the Scaffolding (Coaching and Instructing), and
     Tailor Media Selections to Each Scaffold
Scaffolding refers to temporary support provided by teachers, experts, computer-based
tutors, or more capable peers to help learners learn so that they can complete a task or
solve a problem that they could not accomplish independently (Vygotsky, 1978; Wood
et al., 1976). Scaffolds take a variety of forms, including question prompts, feedback,
advice, checklists, learner guides, templates, and expert modeling.
   Hannafin and colleagues (1999) identified four types of scaffolding: conceptual (guides
learners regarding what to consider in the problem-solving process), metacognitive (facili-
tates metacognitive thinking and processes), procedural (provides guidance on how to
                                                                                     Lower-Level ADE 135

Table 7.14 Instructional Formats

Formats           Definition
Presentation
Lecture         A formal or semiformal oral presentation of information by a single individual; facts,
                   concepts, problems, relationships, or principles presented orally either directly (as by
                   live instructor) or indirectly (as by video).
Demonstration Presentation or portrayal of a sequence of events to show a procedure, principle, or natural
                   process; frequently combines an oral explanation with the operation or handling of
                   equipment or material. May be presented directly (as by a live instructor) or indirectly
                   (as by video or simulation).
Exhibit         A material, visual, or print display used to present information; for example, actual equipment,
                   models, mockups, graphic materials, displays, whiteboard, or projected images.
Panel Discourse Verbal interaction among two or more individuals which is heard by the learner; may be a
                   dramatization, such as role playing, or a dialogue between panel members, or a teaching
                   interview (a question and answer session between instructor and visiting “expert”).
Reading         Printed materials, such as books, periodicals, manuals, handouts, or electronic readings.
                   Readings may be course-assigned or self-assigned.
Teaching        Question and answer session between the instructor and visiting “expert” following a
  Interview        highly structured plan.
Learner Interaction
Questioning     An instructor- and/or courseware-controlled interactive process used to emphasize a
                   point, stimulate thinking, keep learners alert, check understanding, or review material.
                   Questioning may be direct, as by a live instructor, or may be designed into a film or
                   television presentation.
Programmed      An instructor and/or software-controlled interactive process used to systematically
   Questioning     demand a sequence of appropriate learner responses; may be used directly (as by an
                   instructor in a classroom) or indirectly (as by a programmed computer).
Learner Query The provision by which learners are given the opportunity to search for information, as by
                   questioning a classroom instructor, tutor, coach, or the Internet.
Seminar         A peer-controlled group interactive process in which task- or objective-related information
                   and experience are evoked from the learners. Questions may be used to evoke learner
                   contributions, but the seminar is different from questioning.
Discussion      An interactive process of sharing information and experiences related to achieving a
                   learner objective.
Knowledge Application
Performance   Learner interactions with things, data, or persons, as is necessary to attain learner
                 objectives; includes all forms of simulation (for example, games and interaction with
                 hardware simulators) and interaction with actual equipment or job materials (for
                 example, forms). Performance may be observed by classroom instructor, tutor, coach,
                 or peer to provide needed feedback. When the performance is done with technology,
                 the technology may be designed to provide the feedback (as in a computer-based
                 simulation). Projects are interrelated sets of performances.
Case Study    A carefully designed description of a problem situation, written specifically to provoke
                 systematic analysis and discussion by learners. This can also be viewed as a form of
                 learner interaction.



utilize resources and tools), and strategic (provides guidance on how to approach learning
tasks or problems). These are illustrated in Table 7.15.
   Saye and Brush (2002) distinguished between hard scaffolds and soft scaffolds. Hard
scaffolds are “anticipated and planned in advance based on typical learner difficulties with
a task” (p. 81), while soft scaffolds provide dynamic and spontaneous support based on
136 Lower-Level ADE


Table 7.15 Four Types of Scaffolding with Subtypes and an Example for Each

Type of Scaffold              Subtypes               Illustrations
Conceptual (what the learner Project specification Project instructions and evaluation criteria
  should consider)           Project resources     Relevant articles and project samples
Metacognitive (how the        Templates              A template for project planning
  learner should think)                              A template for progress report
                              Question prompts       Question prompts facilitating project planning &
                                                        monitoring
Procedural (how to utilize    Step-by-step           A video demonstrating how to complete a certain task
   resources, tools)             instructions
Strategic (how to approach    Instructor feedback    Feedback on project plans and progress reports
   problems and learning)     Tips                   Tips for approaching the project



learner responses. Myers and Reigeluth (2017) propose that scaffolding can be provided
by adjusting aspects of the task or context in which it is performed, coaching the learner, or
instructing the learner.
    There is no question about the importance of scaffolding in instruction, especially in
learning-by-doing. Many learners, both adults and children, are accustomed to teacher-
centered instruction and overwhelmed by the complexity of applications in learner-
centered instruction (LCI), including self-directed learning. Scaffolding can accelerate
and broaden learning, while decreasing frustration and increasing learner motivation to
learn.
    Here we have synthesized the above-mentioned kinds of instructional scaffolding into
two major kinds for you to consider adding to the design of the tasks or applications:
coaching and instructing.

Coaching Strategies
Coaching is a type of instructional scaffolding that can provide all four of Hannafin et al.’s
(1999) kinds of scaffolding – both hard and soft – while the learner is working on a project
or application, and it can be provided either by a human or by the learner’s virtual men-
tor (on a digital device). It primarily entails providing information or tips to the learner,
though it can include a short demonstration for a skill or topic. More extensive demonstra-
tions and practice with feedback go beyond coaching and are considered instructing. To
enhance authenticity, coaching usually requires freezing time in the project or application,
as in a “time-out” in sports scrimmages.
   When to coach. Coaching should be used when the learner needs only a little help.
Larger amounts of help are typically best provided through instructing under authentic
conditions. Naturally, there is a blurry line between coaching and instructing.
   How to coach. Coaching can take the form of providing information, providing a hint
or tip, or providing an understanding. The latter two kinds of coaching can take either an
inquisitory or an expository form. The inquisitory form occurs as questions to the learner that
help the learner to discover an appropriate hint or understanding, as occurs in a Socratic
dialogue. The expository form occurs as statements or visuals that provide the hint or stimu-
late the understanding.
                                                                                 Lower-Level ADE 137

     Table 7.16 Motivational Strategies in the ARCS Model (Keller, 1987)

     Attention Strategies    Relevance Strategies   Confidence Strategies   Satisfaction Strategies
     Incongruity, conflict   Experience             Learning requirements   Natural consequences
     Concreteness            Present worth          Difficulty              Unexpected rewards
     Variability             Future usefulness      Expectations            Positive outcomes
     Humor                   Need matching          Attributions            Negative influences
     Inquiry                 Modeling               Self-confidence         Scheduling
     Participation           Choice


Instructional Strategies
The instructional strategies should differ depending on the kind of learning involved: (1)
remembering information, (2) understanding conceptual and theoretical relationships, (3)
applying skills and higher-order skills, and (4) acting on attitudes and values. Detailed guid-
ance for these instructional strategies is provided in the next chapter. As you select instruc-
tional strategies for each of these kinds of learning, tailor your media selections to each.

6.3. Design the Motivational Support
Motivation plays a significant role in learning. Keller (1987, 2010) has developed a general
model integrating the various sources of motivation for learning. He calls it the ARCS
model, an acronym for the four sets of strategies that can be used to motivate a learner (see
Table 7.16).

•    Attention involves grabbing the learner's interest at the beginning of instruction and
     maintaining that interest throughout the lesson and course
•    Relevance is the personal significance and value to the learner of mastering the learn-
     ing objectives
•    Confidence relates to the learner's expectancy of success
•    Satisfaction comes from achieving performance goals

Adapt these motivational strategies to your instructional approach. These strategies are
done differently depending on whether you are using the learner-centered approach or the
teacher-centered approach. Please refer to Chapter 4 for other motivational strategies or
frameworks, including self-determination theory and Octalysis. It is usually best to design
the motivational strategies while you are designing the instructional scaffolding (i.e., do
Steps 6.2 and 6.3 simultaneously).

6.4. Design the Assessments
For each of the types of learning (information, understandings, skills, and attitudes)
that is needed for the learner to succeed in the project or application for which you are
designing instruction, certification of proficiency should be required before the learner
is allowed to resume work on the project. With computer-based instruction, assess-
ment of proficiency should be fully integrated with the instruction so that the practice or
application also serves as the assessment. Accuracy should be the primary criterion for
all kinds of learning, and it is typically measured as x performances correct in a row,
138 Lower-Level ADE


Table 7.17 Example of Dimensions of Divergence (or Equivalence Classes)

Skill: Adding Fractions
Denominator      Fractions with a common denominator
                 Fractions in which the denominators contain a common factor (can be reduced)
                 Fractions in which the denominators are not common and have no common factor
                    (cannot be reduced)
Sum              Smaller than 1
                 Larger than 1
Type of Fraction Proper
                 Improper
Digits           One-digit numerators and denominators
                 (Each of the other possible combinations)



or x out of the last y performances correct, without assistance. The number required
should be based on the amount of divergence (what Scandura, 1973, refers to as the
number of “equivalence classes” – classes of instances of a generality that vary from
each other in consistent ways) for the given kind of learning (see Table 7.17 for an
example).
   For kinds of learning that should be automatized,2 the certification also depends on
reaching a criterion for speed of performance, such as sufficient speed for x performances
in a row or for x of the last y. Alternatively, the learner could be given another task that
requires strategic thinking while having to perform the automatized task, but speed of
performance is still a factor.
   When the practice/assessment cannot be done on a computer or tablet, the instruc-
tor will likely have to give an assessment separate from and after the instruction is
complete. The assessment should require performances that are as authentic as pos-
sible, and it should assess all the major dimensions of divergence (equivalence classes).
Criteria for mastery listed in the designer objectives should be used, and when a learner
does not meet the criteria, provision should be made for remediation and reassessing.
   Having mastery assessments of each individual piece of organizing and supporting con-
tent does not guarantee that the learner can put it all together, so it is advisable to assess
the learner on the level of performing the whole version of the task or applying the whole
topic. Of course, that performance should be as authentic (consistent with real-world situ-
ations) as possible.

7. Formatively Evaluate the ADE Document
This guidance is the same for both task and topic expertise.
   In a quantitative rapid prototype approach, when you have done the preceding activi-
ties for a version of the task or a topic (or large subtopic), you should formatively evalu-
ate as much of this design as is feasible (see Chapter 10) before designing instruction for
any other versions or topics. This may require developing parts or all of this design (see
Chapter 9 for guidance) so that you will have something approximating real instruction


2   Automatization is needed when the real-world performance requires strategic thinking or other cognitive tasks to be
    performed simultaneously with it.
                                                                       Lower-Level ADE 139
that you can try out on learners. But it is often advisable to formatively evaluate some
designs with simple mock-ups of the instruction before developing that instruction.
Finding improvements now should reduce the amount of revision needed for the design
of subsequent versions or topics.
   Your formative evaluation can finally involve tryouts with learners. So, among the
options described in Chapter 10 (Formative Evaluation), if you are designing instruction
for group-based learning, you should conduct individual and small-group tryouts with
representative samples of your target learners for the results of Step 6. If you are designing
individualized instruction, you should conduct alpha tests. Operational tryouts and beta
tests should be done in the later stages of development (Chapter 9). Expert reviews are
much less helpful at this stage of the ID process, but they could occasionally be useful.
Refer to your evaluation plan for the ID project and Chapter 10 for guidance.
   If you are using a qualitative rapid prototype approach, do the preceding activities for
each subsequent version or topic, and then proceed to formatively evaluate your designs.

8. Begin Developing the Implementation Plan, and
   Update the Project Management Plan
Once the instructional system has been designed and before much of the development work
begins, it is important to begin developing the implementation plan (see Chapter 11 for
guidance), because implementation issues can influence the design. This plan should pro-
vide details on how to execute, monitor, and control the instructional system.
   Additionally, update the ID project management plan to reflect changes made in the
design phase.
   For a quantitative rapid prototype approach, when you have finished this step with the
one task or topic, go directly to Chapter 10 to develop the instruction for it. Otherwise,
repeat this chapter for all remaining tasks and topics before proceeding.

Where Are We?
You had previously completed the mid-level ADE process for both task and topic exper-
tise, resulting in a mid-level ADE document (Chapter 6). In this chapter, you added much
more detail to this vision of your new instructional system. This entailed:
 1. Selecting and sequencing the organizing content for each version or topic
 2. Selecting and classifying the supporting content for each version or topic
 3. Sequencing the supporting content for each version or topic
 4. Evaluating and documenting the findings
 5. Identifying resource requirements, availability, and existing instruction for each ver-
    sion or topic
 6. Revising and elaborating the instructional methods for each version or topic
 7. Evaluating the ADE document
 8. Developing the implementation plan, and updating the project management plan

The next chapter (Chapter 8) provides guidance for designing the instructional strategies
in your lower-level ADE for both task and topic expertise, again based on the major con-
siderations described in Chapters 3 and 4 and the designs you have created so far. Finally,
Develop and Deploy are addressed in Chapters 9–12. The whole ADE process is again
summarized in Table 7.18.
140 Lower-Level ADE

Table 7.18 ADE Process for Task Expertise and Topic Expertise (Differences Are in Bold)
              Task Expertise                                         Topic Expertise

Top Level     1. Select and sequence top-level content               1. Select and sequence top-level content
  Ch. 5       2. Plan high-level instructional methods               2. Plan high-level instructional methods
              3. Formatively evaluate and document the top-          3. Formatively evaluate and document the top-
                 level design                                           level design
Mid Level     1. Identify and sequence versions of each              1. Identify and sequence applications of each
  Ch. 6          task                                                   topic
              2. Identify variations within each version and         2. Identify variations within each application
                 create designer objectives                             and create designer objectives
              3. Formatively evaluate the findings                   3. Formatively evaluate the findings
              4. Develop the learner objectives for each version     4. Develop the learner objectives for each topic
              5. Design learner assessments for each version         5. Design learner assessments for each topic
              6. Design the ways that learning by doing will be      6. Design the ways that learning by doing will be
                 accomplished for each version                          accomplished for each topic
              7. Select media in general for the version             7. Select media in general for the application
              8. Formatively evaluate and document the results       8. Formatively evaluate and document the results
Lower         1. Select and sequence the organizing content for      1. Select and sequence the organizing content for
  Level          each version of the task                               each topic
  Ch. 7       2. Select and classify the supporting content for      2. Select and classify the supporting content for
                 each version                                           each topic
              3. Sequence the supporting content for each            3. Sequence the supporting content for each
                 version                                                topic
             4. Evaluate and document the findings                   4. Evaluate and document the findings
              5. Identify resource requirements, availability, and   5. Identify resource requirements, availability,
                 existing instruction for each version                  and existing instruction for each topic
              6. Revise and elaborate the instruction and            6. Revise and elaborate the instruction and
                 assessments for each version                           assessments for each topic
              7. Formatively evaluate the ADE document               7. Formatively evaluate the ADE document
              8. Begin developing the implementation plan, and       8. Begin developing the implementation plan,
                 update the project management plan                     and update the project management plan
   Ch. 8     Detailed guidance is provided for Lower-Level Step 6: Revise and Elaborate the Instruction and
             Assessments for Each Version/Topic. It includes instructional strategies for:
                • Remembering information
                • Understanding relationships
                • Applying skills and higher-order skills
                • Acting on attitudes or values




Exercises
Here again we offer suggestions for a professor using this book as a textbook in a course,
to help the students understand more deeply the contents of this chapter. We suggest that
you keep the same teams of about three students each to continue to work on their ID
projects throughout the course. However, these exercises can be done individually by any
reader who wants to deepen their understanding and skills.

 1. Have each team prepare a lower-level ADE document for at least one version of one
    task or at least one topic in their project. For what you consider to be the best ADE
    documents, we suggest you get written permission from the students to use them as
    examples in the next offering of your course.
                                                                                             Lower-Level ADE 141
 2. Have each team offer suggestions for improvement for the ADE document of one or
    two other teams before you review and provide feedback to the students.
 3. Have a whole-class, synchronous discussion of the strengths and weaknesses of this
    lower-level ADE process, including any difficulties or challenges they faced during
    the process and what changes to the process might have helped. We would love to get
    your suggestions for improvement.

References
Ausubel, D.P. (1968). Educational psychology: A cognitive view. New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston.
Beissner, K. L., & Reigeluth, C. M. (1994). A case study on course sequencing with multiple strands using the
   elaboration theory. Performance Improvement Quarterly, 7(2), 38–61.
Bruner, J.S. (1966). Toward a theory of instruction. Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press.
Creative Commons USA. (n.d.). A brief copyright primer. Retrieved from https://creativecommonsusa.org/
   wp-content/uploads/2018/01/Copyright-and-Open-Licensing-Primer.pdf.
Gagné, R.M. (1968). Learning hierarchies. Educational Psychologist, 6(1), 1–6.
Gagné, R.M. (1985). The conditions of learning and theory of instruction. New York, NY: Holt, Rinehart, and Winston.
Hannafin, M.J., Land, S., & Oliver, K. (1999). Open learning environments: Foundations, methods, and
   models. In C. M. Reigeluth (Ed.), Instructional-design theories and models: A new paradigm of instructional theory
   (Vol. II, pp. 115-140). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Assoc.
Kamradt, T.F., & Kamradt, E.J. (1999). Structured design for attitudinal instruction. In C.M. Reigeluth (Ed.),
   Instructional-design theories and models: A new paradigm of instructional theory (Vol. II, pp. 563–590). Mahwah, NJ:
   Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Keller, J.M. (1987). Strategies for stimulating the motivation to learn. Performance and Instruction, 26, 1–7.
Keller, J.M. (2010). Motivational design for learning and performance: The ARCS model approach. New York, NY:
   Springer.
Lee, J.Y., & Reigeluth, C.M. (2003). Formative research on the heuristic task analysis process. Educational
   Technology Research and Development, 51(4), 5–24.
Lee, J.Y., & Reigeluth, C.M. (2009). Heuristic task analysis on e-learning course development: A formative
   research study. Asia Pacific Educational Review, 10(1), 169–181.
Mayer, R. E. (1976). Integration of information during problem solving due to a meaningful context of
   learning. Memory and Cognition, 4(5), 603–608.
Merrill, M.D., Tennyson, R.D., & Posey, L.O. (1992). Teaching concepts: An instructional design guide. Englewood
   Cliffs, NJ: Educational Technology Publications.
Merrill, P.F. (1976). Task analysis – An information processing approach. NSPI Journal, 15(2), 7–11.
Merrill, P.F. (1978). Hierarchical and information processing task analysis: A comparison. Journal of Instructional
   Development, 1(2), 35–40.
Myers, R.D., & Reigeluth, C.M. (2017). Designing games for learning. In C.M. Reigeluth, B.J. Beatty, & R.D.
   Myers (Eds.), Instructional-design theories and models, Vol. IV: The learner-centered paradigm of education (pp. 205-
   242). New York, NY: Routledge.
Reigeluth, C.M. (1987). Lesson blueprints based on the elaboration theory of instruction. In C.M. Reigeluth
   (Ed.), Instructional theories in action: Lessons illustrating selected theories and models (pp. 245–288). Hillsdale, NJ:
   Lawrence Erlbaum Assoc.
Reigeluth, C.M. (1999). The elaboration theory: Guidance for scope and sequence decisions. In C. M. Reigeluth
   (Ed.), Instructional-design theories and models: A new paradigm of instructional theory (Vol. II, pp. 425–453). Mahwah,
   NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Reigeluth, C.M. (2007). Order, first step to mastery: An introduction to sequencing in instructional design. In
   F. Ritter, J. Nerb, E. Lehtinen & T. O’Shea (Eds.), In order to learn, How the sequence of topics influences learning
   (pp. 19–40). New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Reigeluth, C.M., & Darwazeh, A. (1982). The elaboration theory's procedure for designing instruction: A
   conceptual approach. Journal of Instructional Development, 5(3), 22–32.
Saye, J.W., & Brush, T. (2002). Scaffolding critical reasoning about history and social issues in multimedia-
   supported learning environments. Educational Technology Research and Development, 50(3), 77–96.
142 Lower-Level ADE
Scandura, J.M. (1973). Structural learning and the design of educational materials. Educational Technology, 13(8),
   7–13.
Stanford University Libraries. (n.d.). Educational fair use guidelines. Retrieved from https://fairuse.stanford.
   edu/overview/academic-and-educational-permissions/non-coursepack/#educational_fair_use_guidelin
   es.
Stim, R. (2019). Getting permission: Using & licensing copyright-protected materials online & off (7th ed.). Pleasanton,
   CA: Nolo.
U.S. Copyright Office. (2019). U.S. Copyright office fair use index. Retrieved from https://www.copyright
   .gov/fair-use/.
Vygotsky, L.S. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher psychological processes (M. Cole, V. John-Steiner, S.
   Scribner, & E. Souberman Eds.). Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Wood, D.J., Bruner, J.S., & Ross, G. (1976). The role of tutoring in problem solving. Journal of Child Psychiatry
   and Psychology, 17(2), 89–100.
8         Lower Level ADE
          Instructional Strategies for Just-in-Time Tutorials




Overview
Having now selected all your content (organizing and supporting), this chapter continues
the guidance for selecting instructional strategies – lower-level analysis, design, and evalu-
ation (ADE) – from Chapter 7. It provides considerable detail about designing just-in-time
tutorials for both organizing content and supporting content, within both task and topic
expertise. But keep in mind that such tutorials may well already exist on online platforms
like the Khan Academy. This is part of Step 6.2, introduced in Chapter 7. This guidance
is overviewed in Table 8.1, where we identify instructional strategies for the four major
kinds of learning.
   As a part of Step 6 in Chapter 7, you selected the appropriate instructional formats and
designed the “coaching” type of instructional scaffolds. In this chapter, we offer detailed
guidance for designing just-in-time tutorials for individual pieces of content (which we call
segments of instruction) on the lower level of the ADE process, when such tutorials are not
already available online. It is often beneficial to do some development simultaneously with
the design of these individual segments of instruction.
   It is helpful to think of two parts of your development activities: scripting1 and produc-
ing. Scripting is developing the exact wording and layout, while producing is developing
the media according to the script. You may find it easier to do much of the scripting as
you make the instructional-strategy and motivational design decisions for each individual
piece of content.
   The instructional strategies should differ depending on the kind of learning involved:

    1. Remembering information is rote, nonmeaningful learning.
    2. Understanding conceptual and theoretical relationships is a kind of meaningful
       learning that is somewhat like a lightbulb – it happens suddenly when the “aha!”
       moment comes.
    3. Applying skills and higher-order skills is a kind of learning that happens gradually
       with practice.
    4. Acting on attitudes and values can be learned suddenly or gradually and has affec-
       tive, behavioral, and cognitive components, such that one can cognitively hold a cer-
       tain attitude but seldom act on it – of course, there are other kinds of learning in the
       affective domain, which we will briefly describe later.


1     We use this term broadly to refer to all the determination of the exact wording and layout of the instruction for all
      media – print, digital, human, etc.
144 Lower Level ADE, Instructional Strategies

Table 8.1 Lower-Level Analysis and Design Processes for Task and Topic Expertise (Continued from
          Table 7.1)
6. Revise and elaborate instruction, media, and assessments for each version or topic
   6.2. Design the scaffolding: coaching and instructing
      1. Remember information
         • Primary strategies
         • Secondary strategies
         • Control strategies

      2. Understand conceptual and theoretical relationships
         Understand causal relationships
         • Primary strategies
         • Secondary strategies
         • Performance strategies
         • Control strategies

        Understand natural process relationships
        • Primary strategies
        • Secondary strategies
        • Performance strategies
        • Control strategies

        Understand conceptual relationships
        • Dimensions of understanding
        • Primary strategies
        • Secondary strategies
        • Control strategies

      3. Apply skills and higher-order skills
         • Primary strategies
         • Secondary strategies
         • Control strategies

      4. Act on attitudes and values
         • Primary strategies
         • Secondary strategies



Table 8.2 provides some general guidance for the timing of the instructional support.

1. Remember Information
Traditionally, remember-level learning has been overemphasized in both training and edu-
cation. However, when remembering is important for learners to master a task or topic, it
can be accelerated by using appropriate primary, secondary, and control strategies.
                                                           Lower Level ADE, Instructional Strategies 145

Table 8.2 Timing for the Instruction

For Learner-Centered Instruction                        For Teacher-Centered Instruction
The project or application should typically be          The instruction is typically provided to the whole
  introduced before any instruction is provided. The      group of learners before any activities are
  instruction should be provided “just in time” when      introduced. This can involve many hours and
  it is needed during the project or application. It is   days of instruction that typically occurs out of
  usually necessary to “freeze time” in the project       context, and thus may be less meaningful and
  or application while the instruction is provided.       motivational than offering the instruction just
  An ideal way to provide the instruction is for each     in time. However, there may be circumstances
  learner to have a tablet that has their own virtual     that require this approach. If learners all
  mentor to tutor them in the required supporting and     progress in their instruction at the same
  organizing content or to use a website like the Khan    pace, you may find ways to provide some of
  Academy. However, it can alternatively be done          the instruction just-in-time during student
  by an instructor or peer tutor, though certifying       activities.
  mastery is more problematic this way.


Primary Strategies
The primary strategies are to present what is to be remembered and to practice recalling or
recognizing it (depending on the post-instructional requirements) with immediate feedback
(Leshin, Pollock, & Reigeluth, 1992; Merrill, 1983, 2013).

Presentation
Information to be memorized generally has two parts: the stimulus and the response. The
stimulus is whatever cue that calls for the information to be remembered, while the response
is the information to be remembered. For example, the stimulus could be the name of a
state and the response its capital. The presentation should provide the stimulus followed
immediately by the response.

Practice
Decide if recognition or recall is needed for the real-world task. The practice should pro-
vide the stimulus and ask the learner for the response (if recall is needed), or it should pro-
vide both the stimulus and a right or wrong response and ask the learner if the response is
correct (if only recognition is needed). Sometimes the real-world task can require occasionally
reversing the response and the stimulus, in which case the stimulus and response should
occasionally be switched. For example, you could give the name of a capital and ask for
its state some of the time and give the name of the state and ask for its capital other times.
    The practice should be repeated until the learner has met a criterion for mastery, making a
separate assessment unnecessary and ensuring that mastery has been reached before the
learner moves on, rather than having to remediate later. The criterion may be for accu-
racy (e.g., “the information is successfully recalled or recognized ten consecutive times
unaided”) or for speed (e.g., “the speed of correct response averages 1.0 second or less
ten consecutive times unaided”) – using speed of performance as an indicator that the
performance has become automatic (called “automatization” in the research literature),
important for freeing up the learner’s cognitive resources for higher-level strategic think-
ing during application of the task or topic.
146 Lower Level ADE, Instructional Strategies
Feedback
The learner should be given feedback immediately after the response, so the learner may
learn from the practice. The feedback can merely confirm the learner is right or wrong, or it
may provide the correct response when the learner is wrong, and it may remind the learner of
a mnemonic (described under Secondary Strategies) to aid the learner’s recall or recognition
process.

Secondary Strategies
These strategies (see Table 8.3) are not needed if the information is easy to remember
(Gropper, 1974, 1983; Merrill, 1983). More secondary strategies should be used when
the information is more difficult to remember. However, when in doubt, include fewer
secondary strategies (minimalist instruction), and add in more if learners have difficulty in
your formative evaluations.

Control Strategies
Control strategies are for controlling the use of the other two kinds of strategies, such
as amount and timing of those strategies. The two main control strategies are instructor
(digital or human) control and learner control. Memorizing information is a burdensome task
and many aspects of the instruction are often best controlled by the instructor, even in
learner-centered instruction. Guidelines for the control strategies are shown in Table 8.4,
but please keep in mind that the optimal control of instructional strategies can vary a lot
from one situation to another and one learner to another.

2. Understand Conceptual and Theoretical Relationships
We have just offered guidance for instructional strategies for remembering information.
Here we address understanding relationships. This kind of learning is promoted by dif-
ferent instructional strategies depending on whether the relationships are causal, natural
process, or conceptual.

Table 8.3 Secondary Strategies for Remember-Level Instruction

Strategy     Guidance
Repetition   Use for both the presentation and the practice.
Chunking     Divide up large amounts of information into manageable chunks – usually seven plus or
               minus two items, according to research by Miller (1956) – and use presentation, practice,
               and feedback until mastery on one chunk before moving to the next chunk. The more
               complex the information, the smaller the chunks should be.
Spacing      Provide for passage of some time between consecutive practice or assessment items for any
                given piece of information.
Prompting    Provide hints (e.g., “begins with ‘p’”) when the learner has difficulty remembering an item.
Mnemonics Include rhymes, songs, acronyms, images, and so forth, when helpful. You can provide them,
             or you can request the learners to develop their own. You can also provide prompting to
             provide hints for remembering the mnemonic.
Review       Periodically assess the learner on an item from an earlier chunk (called the “review pool” by
                Salisbury, 1990), and if the learner could not remember it, include it in the “active pool.”
                                                             Lower Level ADE, Instructional Strategies 147

Table 8.4 Control Strategies for Remember-Level Instruction

Strategies       Control Strategy
Presentation    Presentation should usually begin under instructor control with one round of presentation
   and Practice    for a chunk, and then typically revert to learner control. Practice should be under learner
                   control, but the practice should generally continue until the current chunk is mastered.
                   Ideally, learners should be coached to self-direct the decisions about when to receive
                   presentation or practice.
Repetition of The learner should be able to look at the information (stimulus and response together
  Presentation  or the entire chunk of information) whenever they want. Also, each item in a chunk
  and Practice  should be repeated in each round of practice until it is mastered, based on the
                criterion for number of consecutive correct responses and/or speed of responses
                (instructor control). When the criterion is met, the item is put into the “review pool”
                and periodically placed back into the “active pool” for review in subsequent chunks
                (Salisbury, 1990). Decisions about item selection within a chunk should typically be
                done randomly unless order of items is a natural part of the remember-level task in the
                real world (instructor control). It is difficult for the learner to manage this process.
Chunking         Learners should be helped to self-direct decisions about the size of the chunks, adjusting
                    the size based on the learner’s current and past performance with chunks of similar
                    size, complexity, and level of familiarity. However, digital systems are well suited to
                    make such decisions and are usually more effective (instructor control).
Spacing          Decisions about spacing (frequency of review) should be made based on historical data
   (Review)        about optimal spacing for review of mastered items for each student (instructor control).
                   Typically, the spacing of review gradually increases (farther apart) over time for a given
                   item, unless the learner fails a review, in which case its spacing decreases (its frequency
                   of review increases). These decisions are difficult for learners to make on their own but
                   easy to implement on a digital device.
Prompting        The learner could be allowed to request a prompt at any time a response is not forthcoming,
                   but the instructor could also provide a prompt if the learner takes a long time to respond.
                   (Of course, prompted practice does not count toward mastery of the item.)
Mnemonics        Mnemonics are typically provided by the instructor to all learners, but they could be offered
                   only when a learner has difficulty remembering (instructor or learner control), or the
                   learner may be prompted and aided to generate a mnemonic of his or her own (instructor
                   and learner control); or the learner could request a mnemonic or generate a mnemonic
                   of their own unprompted and unaided (learner control).


2.1 Understand Causal Relationships
Causal relationships typically exist in sets, wherein there are multiple causes of an effect,
multiple effects of a cause, chains of cause-effect relationships, and cycles of cause-effect
relationships (see Figure 8.1). These sets are called causal models. This kind of learning can
be promoted by using appropriate primary, secondary, performance, and control strategies
(Reigeluth, 1983; Reigeluth & Schwartz, 1989; Sloman, 2005; White & Frederiksen, 1990).

Primary Strategies
The primary instructional strategies are related to acquisition and application of the causal
relationship(s). Acquisition is promoted by telling the learner what the causal relation-
ships are (a generality) and providing the learner with examples of them (demonstrations).
Application is promoted by providing opportunities for the learner to use the causal
148 Lower Level ADE, Instructional Strategies



                                   Surface
                                 temperature




                                                      Surface
                                 Evaporation
                                                      moisture




                                 Atmospheric
          Surface
                                 moisture &         Precipitation
          moisture
                                   clouds




                                                    Atmospheric
          Surface
                                 Precipitation      moisture &
        temperature
                                                      clouds




                                 Evaporation



Figure 8.1 Example of a Causal model.


relationships (practice), with immediate feedback (see Table 8.5). The primary strategy for
assessment is unaided practice to a criterion for mastery.

Secondary Strategies
These strategies (see Table 8.6) are not needed if the causal relationships are easy to under-
stand. More strategies should be used as the causal relationships become more difficult
to understand. However, when in doubt, include fewer secondary strategies (minimalist
instruction), and add in more if learners have difficulty in your formative evaluations.

Kinds of Performance
The basic elements of causal understanding are causes and effects, often in chains and
with multiple causes and multiple effects, making for complex causal models. These causal
models can be used in three different ways (three kinds of performance) – explanation,
prediction, and solution (see the left column in Table 8.7) – meaning that the kind of
performance shown in the demonstrations and required in the practice can be any of
those three types (Reigeluth & Schwartz, 1989). For complex causal relationships, there
are multiple causes, multiple effects, cause-effect chains, and causal loops, and the rela-
tionships are probabilistic rather than deterministic. Probabilistic means that the causal
                                                                   Lower Level ADE, Instructional Strategies 149

Table 8.5 Examples of the Primary Strategies for Understanding Causal Relationships

Phase of Learning Acquisition                                         Application
Primary Strategy     Generality               Demonstration           Practice               Feedback
Example 1.   Metals expand when (Show a video          What would happen (Ask questions or
  Principle    heated; the more    demonstrating         to railroad rails   give hints that
  of Thermal   the heating,        that the length of    on a hot day if     help the learner
  Expansion    the more the        a steel rod changes   they were installed to discover his/
               expansion.          when it is heated     touching end to     her error(s) or
                                   up.)                  end on a cold day?  misconceptions.)
Example 2.           An increase in       In November 2018, What would happen                (Ask questions or
  Law of               demand causes         a decrease in       to the price                   give hints that
  Demand               an increase           demand for Apple    of bananas if                  help the learner
                       in price, and         Inc. stock caused a they became                    to discover his/
                       a decrease in         30% drop in price.  unpopular?                     her error(s) or
                       demand causes a                                                          misconceptions.)
                       decrease in price.



Table 8.6 Secondary Strategies for Understanding Causal Relationships
Form of Generality                Can be either expository (wherein a prototypical demonstration of the causal
                                    relationship should be provided with the generality) or confirmatory
                                    (discovered by the learner from examples).
Form of Demonstration             Can be either passive (observation) or active (involving exploration or
                                    manipulation of either the causes to observe their effects, or the effects to
                                    observe what caused them).
Form of Feedback                  Should almost always be immediate.
                                  Can be either natural (natural consequences, as in a simulation) or artificial
                                    (supplied by the instructor or other medium).
                                  Can simply confirm (right or wrong), provide a hint, provide the correct answer,
                                    and/or provide an explanation.
                                  Can be informational and/or motivational.
Attention-Focusing Devices        Can be used on the generality, demonstrations, and feedback (e.g., bold, color,
                                    loudness, zoom, etc.).
Alternative Representations       Can be used on the generality, demonstrations, and feedback (e.g., verbal,
                                    visual, auditory, paraphrase, etc.). If the causal relationships are portrayed
                                    with different representations in the real world, then practice should also be
                                    portrayed with those various representations.
Easy-to-Difficult Sequence        May or may not be used on the demonstrations and practice, depending on the
                                    difficulty of the causal understanding.


factor increases the chances that the effect will happen, whereas deterministic means that
the effect is certain to happen. The kind(s) of performance used in the demonstrations
and practice (explanation, prediction, and/or solution) should be consistent with those
required by application of the task or topic in the real-world.
    One other aspect of using causal understanding in the application of a task or topic is that
it requires learning a performance strategy for doing that kind of performance using the causal
understanding. You need to identify the performance strategy, which is typically more
heuristic than procedural. This performance strategy should be explicitly taught using a
150 Lower Level ADE, Instructional Strategies

Table 8.7 Performance Strategies for Causal Understanding

Kinds of Performance, Each of Which Requires a Strategy for Using the     Teach a Performance Strategy (for all three
Causal Model                                                              kinds of performance)
Explanation: an effect is given, and the learner is asked to explain      Generality: tell them how to use the causal
    what caused it                                                           model to explain, predict, or solve
Prediction: a causal event is given, and the learner is asked to          Demonstrations: show them how to use it
    predict what will happen as a result                                  Practice with feedback: have them use it,
Solution: a desired effect (goal) is given, and the learner is asked to      and give them feedback
    implement the necessary events (causes) to bring it about


generality, demonstrations, and practice with feedback (see the right column in Table 8.7).
A generality alone may be sufficient if the strategy is an easy one. Automatization (or
“overlearning” – meeting a speed criterion after meeting an accuracy criterion) may be
important if the real-world performance is done under time pressure or while performing
other tasks at the same time.

Control Strategies
As always, the two main control strategies are instructor control (digital or human) and
learner control. Guidelines for their use are shown in Table 8.8. Again, it should be appar-
ent that these guidelines for instructor control are easier to implement on a digital medium
than by a human. And please keep in mind that the optimal control of instructional strate-
gies can vary a lot from one situation to another and one learner to another.

2.2 Understand Natural Process Relationships
The basic element of process understanding is a natural sequence of events. Sequences
performed by humans are not included, for they are a kind of skill. An example is the
phases in the life cycle of a flowering plant: a seed sprouts into a seedling, a seedling
grows into a mature plant, the mature plant develops a flower, and the flower forms seeds.
Strategies for teaching and assessing this kind of learning (Reigeluth & Schwartz, 1989)
also include primary, secondary, performance, and control strategies, and they are similar
to those for causal understanding. Therefore, the following only focuses on the differ-
ences, beginning with primary strategies.

Primary Strategies
The primary strategies are to tell the learner what the events in the natural process are
(generality), show the learner what they are (demonstration), and provide opportunities for
the learner to use the natural process (practice), with immediate feedback (see Table 8.9). The
kind of performance shown in the demonstrations and required in the practice is typically
description, which entails describing the events and their sequence. Such descriptions may
include the entire natural process, or they may be as small as describing what immediately
precedes or follows a given event (phase) in the process. The kind(s) of performance used
in the demonstrations and practice should be consistent with those required by applying
the task or topic in the real world. The primary strategy for assessment is unaided practice
until a criterion for mastery is reached.
                                                                 Lower Level ADE, Instructional Strategies 151

Table 8.8 Control Strategies for Causal Understanding

Method                  Control Strategy
Type of                 The instructor (digital or human) typically decides on the type(s) of performance to be
  Performance             taught, based on the real-world applications, but in many cases, this can be done
                          effectively under learner control.
Performance             For difficult causal models, the performance strategy is introduced to the learner (with
   Strategy               generality and demonstration) under instructor control.
                        Then it is often placed under learner control for further access when needed, but
                          wrong-answer feedback typically includes a reminder of the performance strategy
                          under instructor control.
Form of Generality Since deep understanding is particularly important for causal understanding, the
                      decision to use the discovery form of the generality is typically under instructor control
                      (universal), but it can be done effectively under learner control (making it optional).
Form of                 Similarly, since deep understanding is particularly important for causal understanding,
  Demonstration            the decision to use active rather than passive demonstration (as either manipulation
                           or exploration) is typically under instructor control (universal).
Timing                  The decision as to whether and when to see the generality, demonstrations, and
                          practice are typically under learner control (especially with learners coached in
                          making such decisions).
Attention-Focusing These are often under instructor control (universal) at first, then placed under learner control.
Alternative        These are also often under instructor control (universal) at first, then placed under
   Representations   learner control.
Difficulty Level        This is under instructor control by default, meaning it is adapted automatically to learner
                          performance – for example, if the learner gets a practice item wrong, an easier one
                          is automatically given – but the learner may also request items of a different difficulty.
Automatization          Automatization of a response or skill entails making it automatic – such an ingrained
                          habit that the performer does not need to think about it to do it. It requires
                          overlearning. It is generally under instructor control, using a criterion for speed of
                          performance that matches real-world needs. For example, the instruction might be
                          designed to require automatization of the ability to parallel park a car, using a time
                          criterion of five seconds, along with an accuracy criterion of no more than eight
                          inches from the curb and no touching the cars on either end of the parking space.



Table 8.9 Examples of Primary Strategies for Understanding Natural Processes

Strategies         Generality                 Demonstration             Practice               Feedback
Examples for A seed grows into a      A series of photos (or Show a photo of a Confirm for a
  the Life      seedling, which grows    a time-lapse video)   different plant   correct answer,
  Cycle of a    into a mature plant,     of a particular plant and ask what will or give hints
  Flowering     which develops           going through         happen next (or   for an incorrect
  Plant         a flower, which          these stages          what preceded it) answer until it
                produces seeds                                                   is correct


Secondary Strategies
These strategies are the same as for causal understanding, except that the need for automa-
tization is rare.
152 Lower Level ADE, Instructional Strategies
Performance Strategies
A performance strategy may be important for using this kind of understanding in the perfor-
mance of a version of a task or application of a topic and may, therefore, also need to be
explicitly taught using a generality, demonstrations, and practice with feedback.

Control Strategies
These strategies are also the same as for causal understanding.

2.3 Understand Conceptual Relationships
Conceptual understanding is primarily a matter of understanding the relationships among
concepts (Reigeluth, 1983). Strategies for teaching and assessing this kind of learning also
include primary, secondary, and control strategies, but they are heavily influenced by the
desired dimensions of understanding (the important kinds of conceptual relationships).
   Dimensions of understanding. Different kinds of relationships constitute different
dimensions of understanding. The major kinds of relationships include superordinate,
coordinate, and subordinate (in which the concepts may be either parts or kinds of each
other), analogical, and experiential (for examples, see Table 8.10). Many other types exist
but are less common (e.g., order, importance, location). The types of relationships (dimen-
sions of understanding) that you teach should be consistent with those required in the
real-world applications.

Primary Strategies
The primary instructional strategies are to portray the relationship (description) and to
provide opportunities for the learner to use the relationship (application), with immedi-
ate feedback. An example of a description strategy is, “One kind of passenger plane is the
Boeing 767.” An example of an application strategy is, “What are some kinds of passenger
planes?” Demonstrations (examples) are not as relevant here as they are for skills, causal
understanding, and process understanding. The primary strategy for assessment is unaided
application until a criterion for mastery is reached.

Table 8.10 Instructional Strategies for Each Major Kind of Relationship

Kind of Relationship   Instructional Strategy   Example
Superordinate          Context                  One dimension of understanding the concept “civil war” is
                                                  understanding that it is a kind of war (the kinds-superordinate
                                                  relationship)
Coordinate             Comparison and           One dimension of understanding the concept “civil war” is
                         contrast                 understanding how it is similar to and different from a
                                                  revolutionary war (the kinds-coordinate relationship)
Subordinate            Analysis                 One dimension of understanding the concept “civil war” is
                                                  analyzing its major kinds (e.g., religious, geographical, ethnic)
Analogical             Analogy                  One dimension of understanding the concept “civil war” is
                                                  learning about its similarities and differences with a family feud
Experiential           Instantiation            One dimension of understanding the concept “civil war” is
                                                  studying a case, such as the Irish civil war
                                                          Lower Level ADE, Instructional Strategies 153
    Different kinds of relationships require different kinds of descriptions and applica-
tions, as shown in Table 8.10. The most common strategies (descriptions and applications)
include context, comparison and contrast, analysis, analogy (which entails identifying simi-
larities between the concept and a similar concept outside the area of interest) along with
the limitations of the analogy (differences between the two concepts), and instantiation
(providing a concrete instance of the concept). Instantiation is perhaps the most funda-
mental of all dimensions of understanding, for it alone can prevent circularity of defini-
tions by tapping into (or adding to) one’s experiential memory store to provide the most
basic understanding. All the other relationships are among generalities or definitions of
the concepts. In cases where the learner has no preexisting experience with instances of
a concept, it is necessary to introduce such experience. Otherwise, it is only necessary to
relate the concept to the learner’s prior experience. Both are forms of instantiation.
    These strategies address the most common dimensions of conceptual understanding,
but there are many others. The important point is that each dimension of conceptual under-
standing (or type of relationship between concepts) requires a different primary instruc-
tional strategy, and that strategy entails description and/or application (e.g., describe an
analogy to the learner or have the learner describe the analogy).

Secondary Strategies
These strategies (see Table 8.11) are not needed if the concepts are easy to understand.
Again, it is more efficient to use a minimalist approach when unsure if secondary strategies
are needed, and to add more if your formative evaluation reveals the need.

Control Strategies
Guidelines for the use of the primary and secondary strategies are shown in Table 8.12.
Again, instructor control is easier to implement on a digital device than by a human. And
please keep in mind that the optimal control of instructional strategies can vary a lot from
one situation to another and one learner to another.

3. Apply Skills and Higher-Order Skills
We have offered guidance for instructional strategies for remembering information and
understanding relationships. Here we address skills. Strategies for teaching and assessing


Table 8.11 Secondary Strategies for Conceptual Understanding

Method                    Secondary Strategies
Form of Description       Can be either expository or confirmatory (discovery through applications)
Form of Application       Can be for a single dimension or for the entire spectrum of dimensions of
                             understanding desired, and can be separate or integrated into a task
Form of Feedback          Should be immediate; it can be simply confirmatory, provide a hint, or provide a
                             paraphrased description; and it can be informational and/or motivational
Attention-Focusing        Highlighting in print, emphasis in audio, and zoom in video, can be used on the
                             descriptions and feedback
Alternative               Paraphrasing, visuals, audio, and video can be used to enhance the descriptions
   Representations           and feedback
154 Lower Level ADE, Instructional Strategies

Table 8.12 Control Strategies for Conceptual Understanding

Method                     Control Strategy
Dimensions of           The instructor (digital or human) typically decides on the dimension(s) of
  Understanding            understanding to be taught, based on the real-world applications. (The learner
                           typically doesn’t know all the important real-world applications and therefore
                           doesn’t know which dimensions of understanding are important.)
Form of the Description The decision to use the discovery form of the generality is typically under
                           instructor control (universal), depending on the difficulty and importance of
                           the understanding. When the discovery form is used, retention rate is typically
                           better, though time-to-mastery tends to be a bit longer.
Timing                  In contrast, the decision as to whether and when to see the description and the
                           application is typically under learner control.
Attention-Focusing      These are often under instructor control (universal) at first, then placed under
                           learner control (to choose when useful).
Alternative             These are also often under instructor control (universal) at first, then placed under
   Representations         learner control.
Number of Applications This is instructor controlled, based on the criterion for proficiency.


this kind of learning (Merrill, 1983, 2013; van Merriënboer, 1997; van Merriënboer &
Sluijsmans, 2009) also include primary, secondary, and control strategies.

Primary Strategies
The primary strategies for instruction are to tell the learner how to do it (generality), show
the learner how to do it (demonstration), and provide opportunities for the learner to do it
(practice), with immediate feedback. For assessment, the primary strategy is unaided practice
to a criterion for mastery. Each of these instructional strategies (except feedback) dif-
fers a bit depending on whether the skills are concept-classification, procedure-using, or
principle-using (see Table 8.13).

Table 8.13 Different Primary Instructional Strategies for Different Kinds of Skills

                  Concept-Classification         Procedure-Using             Principle-Using
Generality        Label                          Goal                        Causal change
                  Superordinate concept          Steps                       Resulting change (effect)
                  Critical characteristics                                   or
                                                                             Phases
Demonstration     Present an instance            Present a goal & case       Present a case – cause or effect
                  Say whether or not it is an    Perform the steps           Show its effect or cause, or
                     example of the concept                                  Show phases of a case
Practice          Present a new instance         Present a goal & new case Present a case – cause or effect
                  Ask whether or not it is an    Ask student to perform       or process
                     example of the concept         the steps              Ask to predict effect, explain a
                                                                              cause, or achieve a desired
                                                                              effect (goal), or
                                                                           Ask to describe the phases
Feedback          Say right/wrong, or            Say right/wrong, or         Say right/wrong, or
                  Give correct answer, or        Give correct answer, or     Give correct answer, or
                  Give a hint                    Give a hint                 Give a hint
                                                             Lower Level ADE, Instructional Strategies 155
  While generality, demonstration, practice, and feedback are all important for higher-
order skills, they are different in the following ways:
•    Typically, both procedure-using and principle-using strategies are involved.
•    Since broader transfer is required, the demonstrations and practice must have con-
     siderably greater divergence, but it is best to concentrate on a few variations at a
     time.
•    Since they take longer to master, instruction should be spaced over weeks or years
     using the simplifying conditions method (see Chapter 6).

Secondary Strategies
These strategies (see Table 8.14) are not needed if the skill is easy to learn. They are increas-
ingly helpful with increasingly difficult skills. Again, it is more efficient to use a minimalist
approach when unsure if secondary strategies are needed, and to add more if your product
evaluation reveals the need.

Control Strategies
Guidelines for the use of the primary and secondary strategies are shown in Table 8.15.
Again, instructor control is easier to implement on a digital device than by a human, and
learner control can also be somewhat easier on a digital device.

Table 8.14 Secondary Strategies for Applying Skills

Method                      Secondary Strategy
Inductive or Deductive      An inductive approach begins with demonstrations (or practice) and has the
                              learner discover the generality, whereas a deductive approach begins with
                              the generality and follows with demonstrations and practice. Sometimes,
                              the generality is given simultaneously with the demonstration, providing
                              a hybrid approach. The inductive approach can begin with either
                              demonstrations or practice, depending on the learner’s tolerance for failure.
                              The inductive approach tends to result in better understanding and retention
                              of the skill, whereas the deductive approach tends to be more efficient. The
                              inductive approach also enhances inductive reasoning and skills.
Attention-Focusing          Highlighting in textual messages, emphasis in audio messages, and zoom in
                               video messages, to name a few, can be used to enhance the generality,
                               demonstrations, and feedback.
Alternative                 Paraphrasing, visuals, audio, and video, can be used to enhance the generality,
   Representations             demonstrations, and feedback.
Prototypical                Can be provided simultaneously with the generality.
   Demonstration
Easy-to-Difficult Sequence Can be used to enhance the demonstrations and practice.
Item Divergence             Can be used to enhance the demonstrations and practice (making the
   (variations)               items as different as possible from each other, within the full domain of
                              items encountered in the real world, or at least within the types of items
                              encountered at this level of the instruction).
Prompting                   Can be used with the practice.
Automatization              Can be used with the practice by including a criterion for speed of performance
                              in addition to a criterion for accuracy.
156 Lower Level ADE, Instructional Strategies

Table 8.15 Control Strategies for Applying Skills

Method            Control Strategy
Inductive or      This decision can be universal for all learners based on the requirements of the task
   Deductive        (instructor control), or it can be tailored to the learning style of each learner based on
   Approach         whether the learner is a concrete or abstract thinker (instructor control), or it can be
                    placed under learner control based on learner preference. The deductive approach
                    typically begins with simultaneous generality and demonstration (instructor control),
                    though the learner can be given control over this decision.
Sequence of       After the initial instruction (inductive or deductive), the learner is typically given control
   Primary           over which primary strategy component to use next: another demonstration, another
   Strategies        practice, or review of the generality. However, the instructor could exercise some
                     control over this decision, based either on the learner’s learning style or the desire to
                     expose the learner to multiple ways of learning, or if the learner is not making wise
                     learner-control decisions.
Sequence of       The learner is typically given control over whether to receive attention-focusing devices or
   Secondary        alternative representations, and what difficulty level to receive next for demonstrations
   Strategies       and practice. However, the instructor could exercise some control over these decisions,
                    based either on the learner’s learning style or the desire to expose the learner to
                    multiple ways of learning, or if the learner is not making wise learner-control decisions.
Prompting         Decisions for prompting are generally made by the learner, but the instructor might
                    intervene with a prompt if the learner takes too long to perform.
Automatization The decision to automatize the skill is generally under instructor control, along with the
                 criterion for speed of performance, based on real-world requirements.



4. Act on Attitudes or Values
As mentioned in Chapter 3, there are many kinds of learning in the affective domain.
Krathwohl, Bloom and Masia (1964) categorized this domain into five stages of affective
learning: receiving, responding, valuing, organizing, and characterizing. Common catego-
ries of affective learning include attitudes, values, morals, ethics, emotions, intrapersonal
skills, interpersonal skills, and more. In particular, social and emotional learning (SEL) has
received increasing attention since about 2000, but most of the literature is about what to
teach, rather than how to teach it (see e.g., Osher et al., 2016). What little there is on how
to teach it includes the following instructional strategies (Dusenbury & Weissberg, 2017):

•    Attach verbal labels to emotional states to make those states more manageable
•    Practice taking the perspective of another to build empathy
•    Create a school environment conducive to developing healthy emotional and social
     behaviors
•    Create meaningful real-life opportunities to use SEL skills
•    Establish structures to reinforce effective use of SEL skills

These kinds of learning are very complex, resulting in at least 136 frameworks (Berg,
Osher, Moroney, & Yoder, 2017) and research is far from conclusive on how best to foster
them. Therefore, in this book we only address attitudes and values. Strategies for teaching
and assessing this kind of learning (Crano & Prislin, 2008; Kamradt & Kamradt, 1999) also
include primary and secondary strategies.
                                                           Lower Level ADE, Instructional Strategies 157

Table 8.16 Examples of Primary Instructional Strategies for Acting on Attitudes

Attitude Component     Cognitive           Affective                          Behavioral
Primary Strategy       Persuasion          Operant conditioning               Demonstrations, practice
                                                                                and feedback
Examples for           Explore reasons     Enhance empathy by exploring       Create a roleplay situation
  Attitude               why sexual          how their wife/sister/mother        and provide intrinsic
  toward Sexual          harassment is       would feel about it                 rewards for good
  Harassment in          bad                                                     behavior
  the Workplace
Examples for           Explore reasons Enhance empathy by exploring           Create a roleplay situation
  Attitude about         why courteous   (and even experiencing) how             for the learner to practice
  Courteous              driving is      the learner would feel in               courteous behaviors
  Driving                important       response to courteous and               and experience the good
                                         uncourteous driving by others           feelings that result


Primary Strategies
Attitudes and values have three major components: cognitive, affective, and psychomotor
(or behavioral). Each requires a different primary strategy (see Table 8.16). The cognitive
component requires persuasion through cognitive reasoning during guided discussions. The
affective component requires operant conditioning (giving or withholding rewards) to develop
positive feelings about the attitude or value. This can be done vicariously through social
modeling, such as observing a person with whom one can easily empathize in a film. The
psychomotor or behavioral component requires demonstrations and practice with feedback to
develop the appropriate behaviors. There is often discrepancy between people’s attitudes
or values and their actual behaviors. For example, teachers with learner-centered teaching
beliefs could be teacher-centered in actual practice. We found that various barriers or fac-
tors often prevent teachers from creating learner-centered classrooms even though they
have learner-centered beliefs (An & Reigeluth, 2011). Thus, it is important to address all
three components to change an existing attitude and consider external factors (e.g., social
pressure) to change actual behaviors. Also, the weaker a learner’s initial attitude, the easier
it will be for the learner to adopt the desired attitude. It is even possible that multiple steps
along the continuum will not be necessary.

Secondary Strategies
Since attitudes and values typically exist on a continuum as described in Chapter 3, all
three components should be moved to a new position on the continuum as close to simul-
taneously as possible, where the attitude or value should be consolidated before making
another move along the continuum. This process continues until the desired point on the
continuum is reached. In the case of attitude toward sexual harassment, the continuum
would range from attitude toward very blatant, offensive behaviors all the way to attitude
toward behaviors that only a few people might find offensive.

Where Are We?
All of the above guidance (see summary in Table 8.1) is part of Step 6.2, Design the
Scaffolding, in Chapter 7. While you are working on the “Instructional Strategies” part of
158 Lower Level ADE, Instructional Strategies
Step 6.2, you should simultaneously work on Step 6.3, Design the Motivational Support,
in Chapter 7. When you have finished with them, you should continue with Step 6.4,
Design the Assessments. And when you have finished with Steps 7, Formatively Evaluate
the ADE Document, and Step 8, Begin Developing the Implementation Plan, and Update
the Project Management Plan, in Chapter 7, you have finished your ADE process for the
qualitative approach to rapid prototyping. For the quantitative approach, you should
repeat all three levels of the ADE process for the next part of your instructional system.
    Finally, Develop and Deploy are addressed in Chapters 9–12. The whole ADE process
is again summarized in Table 8.17.

Exercises
Here again we offer suggestions for a professor using this book as a textbook in a course,
to help the students understand more deeply the contents of this chapter. We suggest that
Table 8.17 ADE Process for Task Expertise and Topic Expertise (Differences Are in Bold)
            Task Expertise                                      Topic Expertise
Top Level   1. Select and sequence top-level content            1. Select and sequence top-level content
  Ch. 5     2. Plan high-level instructional methods            2. Plan high-level instructional methods
            3. Formatively evaluate and document the top-       3. Formatively evaluate and document the top-
               level design                                        level design
Mid Level   1. Identify and sequence versions of each           1. Identify and sequence applications of each
  Ch. 6        task                                                topic
            2. Identify variations within each version and      2. Identify variations within each application
               create designer objectives                          and create designer objectives
            3. Formatively evaluate the findings                3. Formatively evaluate the findings
            4. Develop the learner objectives for each          4. Develop the learner objectives for each
               version                                             topic
            5. Design learner assessments for each version      5. Design learner assessments for each topic
            6. Design the ways that learning by doing will be   6. Design the ways that learning by doing will
               accomplished for each version                       be accomplished for each topic
            7. Select media in general for the version          7. Select media in general for the application
            8. Formatively evaluate and document the results    8. Formatively evaluate and document the results
Lower       1. Select and sequence the organizing content       1. Select and sequence the organizing content
  Level        for each version of the task                        for each topic
  Ch. 7     2. Select and classify the supporting content for   2. Select and classify the supporting content
               each version                                        for each topic
            3. Sequence the supporting content for each         3. Sequence the supporting content for each
               version                                             topic
            4. Evaluate and document the findings               4. Evaluate and document the findings
            5. Identify resource requirements, availability,    5. Identify resource requirements, availability,
               and existing instruction for each version           and existing instruction for each topic
            6. Revise and elaborate the instruction and         6. Revise and elaborate the instruction and
               assessments for each version                        assessments for each topic
            7. Formatively evaluate the ADE document            7. Formatively evaluate the ADE document
            8. Begin developing the implementation plan,        8. Begin developing the implementation plan,
               and update the project management plan              and update the project management plan
   Ch. 8    Detailed guidance is provided for Lower-Level Step 6: Revise and Elaborate the Instruction and
            Assessments for Each Version/Topic. It includes instructional strategies for:
              • Remembering information
              • Understanding relationships
              • Applying skills and higher-order skills
              • Acting on attitudes or values
                                                                        Lower Level ADE, Instructional Strategies 159
you keep the same teams of about three students each to continue to work on their ID
projects throughout the course. However, these exercises can be done individually by any
reader who wants to deepen their understanding and skills.

 1. Have each team prepare a script for the instruction on at least one difficult piece of content
    for each of the four kinds of learning for the version or topic in their lower-level ADE
    document. For what you consider to be the best scripts, we suggest you get written per-
    mission from the students to use them as examples in the next offering of your course.
 2. Have each team offer suggestions for improvement for the scripts of one or two
    other teams before you review and provide feedback to the students.
 3. Have a whole-class, synchronous discussion of the strengths and weaknesses of this
    lower-level scripting process, including any difficulties or challenges they faced during
    the process and what changes to the process might have helped. We would love to get
    your suggestions for improvement.

References
An, Y., & Reigeluth, C.M. (2011). Creating technology-enhanced, learner-centered classrooms: K-12
   teachers’ beliefs, perceptions, barriers, and support needs. Journal of Digital Learning in Teacher Education,
   29(2), 54–62.
Berg, J., Osher, D., Moroney, D., & Yoder, N. (2017). The intersection of school climate and social and emotional
   development. Washington, DC: American Institutes for Research (AIR). Retrieved from https://www.air
   .org/resource/intersection-school-climate-and-social-and-emotional-development.
Crano, W.D., & Prislin, R. (Eds.). (2008). Attitudes and attitude change. New York, NY: Taylor & Francis Group.
Dusenbury, L., & Weissberg, R.P. (2017). Social emotional learning in elementary school: Preparations for
   success. Retrieved from https://www.rwjf.org/en/library/research/2017/04/social-emotional-learning-
   in-elementary-school.html.
Gropper, G.L. (1974). Instructional strategies. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Educational Technology Publications.
Gropper, G.L. (1983). A behavioral approach to instructional prescription. In C.M. Reigeluth (Ed.),
   Instructional-design theories and models: An overview of their current status (Vol. I, pp. 101–161). Hillsdale, NJ:
   Lawrence Erlbaum Assoc.
Kamradt, T.F., & Kamradt, E.J. (1999). Structured design for attitudinal instruction. In C.M. Reigeluth (Ed.),
   Instructional-design theories and models: A new paradigm of instructional theory (Vol. II, pp. 563–590). Mahwah, NJ:
   Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Krathwohl, D.R., Bloom, B.S., & Masia, B.B. (1964). Taxonomy of educational objectives: The classification of educational
   goals: Handbook 2, Affective domain. New York: Longman.
Leshin, C.B., Pollock, J., & Reigeluth, C.M. (1992). Instructional design strategies and tactics. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
   Educational Technology Publications.
Merrill, M.D. (1983). Component display theory. In C.M. Reigeluth (Ed.), Instructional-design theories and models:
   An overview of their current status (Vol. I). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Merrill, M.D. (2013). First principles of instruction: Identifying and designing effective, efficient, and engaging instruction. San
   Francisco, CA: Pfeiffer.
Miller, G.A. (1956). The magical number seven, plus or minus two: Some limits on our capacity for processing
   information. Psychological Review, 63(2), 81–97. doi:10.1037/h0043158
Osher, D., Kidron, Y., Brackett, M., Dymnicki, A., Jones, S., & Weissberg, R.P. (2016). Advancing the science
   and practice of social and emotional learning: Looking back and moving forward. In Review of Research in
   Education, 1, pp. 644–681).
Reigeluth, C.M. (1983). Meaningfulness and instruction: Relating what is being learned to what a student
   knows. Instructional Science, 12(3), 197–218 doi:10.1007/BF00051745.
Reigeluth, C.M., & Schwartz, E. (1989). An instructional theory for the design of computer-based simulations.
   Journal of Computer-Based Instruction, 16(1), 1–10.
160 Lower Level ADE, Instructional Strategies
Salisbury, D.F. (1990). Cognitive psychology and Its implications for designing drill and practice programs for
    computers. Journal of Computer-Based Instruction, 17(1), 23–30.
Sloman, S. (2005). Causal models: How people think about the world and its alternatives. New York, NY: Oxford
    University Press.
van Merriënboer, J.J.G. (1997). Training complex cognitive skills: A four-component instructional design model for technical
    training. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Educational Technology Publications.
van Merriënboer, J.J.G., & Sluijsmans, D.M.A. (2009). Toward a synthesis of cognitive load theory, four-
    component instructional design, and self-directed learning. Educational Psychology Review, 21(1), 55–66.
White, B.Y., & Frederiksen, J.R. (1990). Causal model progressions as a foundation for intelligent learning
    environments. Artificial Intelligence, 42(1), 99–157.
Unit 3

Develop




This unit has two chapters. The first offers guidance for developing the instruction, includ-
ing such things as producing instructional media, scriptwriting and storyboarding, graphic
design, and developing a learner guide and instructor guide. The second, Chapter 10, pro-
vides guidance for conducting formative evaluations, an essential part of the development
process. Types of formative evaluation include expert reviews, individual tryouts, small-
group tryouts, and operational field tests, as well as alpha and beta tests for individual
e-learning.




Our Holistic 4D Model of ID.
9      Development




Overview
When a blueprint of the instruction has been created that includes what to teach, how
to teach it, and how to assess it, you are ready to realize your design in the development
phase. In Chapter 8 we explained that there are two major parts of the development phase:
scripting and producing. Scripting is developing the exact wording and layout, while pro-
ducing is developing the media according to the script. You may have done much of
the scripting as you made the instructional-strategy and other design decisions for each
individual piece of content (Chapter 8). However, some additional scripting and script
revision will be necessary as you produce your instructional media, be they print, digital,
human, or other.
   It is important to understand that the development process varies depending on many
factors, including the type of instruction as well as development staff and resources avail-
able. This chapter begins by discussing how the type of instruction influences the work
involved in the development phase. Then it offers guidance for developing instructional
content for learner-centered instruction (LCI). Further, this chapter provides guidance
for producing instructional media, scriptwriting and storyboarding, graphic design, devel-
oping technology-enhanced instruction, and developing a learner guide and an instructor
guide. Finally, the chapter emphasizes the importance of frequent formative evaluation
and revisions (discussed in detail in Chapter 10) throughout the development process.

The Development Process Varies Depending on the Type of Instruction
LCI vs. instructor-centered instruction (ICI). The type of the instruction greatly influ-
ences the work involved in the development phase. First, developing learner-centered
instruction (LCI) is different from developing ICI. For typical ICI, you might develop
PowerPoint presentations or lecture videos, handouts or reading materials, and assess-
ment materials. On the other hand, for LCI you might develop project instructions, pro-
ject media (e.g., videos, images) for presenting problem scenarios, a learner guide and
instructor guide, and just-in-time learning and scaffolding resources.
   Online vs. face-to-face. Second, developing online instruction is different from devel-
oping face-to-face instruction, and blended learning involves both. For online instruction
you need to think about such aspects as navigation, online communication (e.g., syn-
chronous vs. asynchronous), online interactions (e.g., instructor-learner, learner-learner,
learner-content), and online accessibility. In contrast, strictly face-to-face instruction
involves developing resources to guide instructors and learners in either an LCI or ICI
classroom environment.
164 Development
  Learning management system (LMS), development platform, or neither. In
Chapter 5 at the end of Step 2 (Plan Big-Picture Instructional Methods), we encouraged
you to:

•   Determine whether you are required to use, or want to use, a template or pattern for
    your instruction
•   Decide whether the instruction will be delivered on a predetermined platform (course
    management or learning management system)
•   And, if either, to note the limitations of the template and/or platform, so you could
    take them into account when making instructional design decisions

If you did not have to make a choice then, you should decide now what would work best
for your instructional system. A learning or course management system (e.g., Blackboard,
Canvas, Desire2Learn, and Moodle) is often a vital part of development for online or
blended learning, especially when a large amount of content needs to be taught. Learning
management systems enable designers and instructors to easily create and deliver online
courses by providing various tools. Therefore, we encourage you to explore a variety of
LMSs and choose the one that best meets your needs and constraints. In addition, a devel-
opment platform may speed up (and change) the development process, but also may
place major constraints on it, especially in e-learning.
    Instructor present or not. Fourth, developing instructor-free instruction (instruction
in which no instructor is involved) is very different from developing instructor-present
instruction (where there is an instructor, however infrequently). Instructor-free instruction,
especially instructor-free e-learning, is becoming more popular, because it allows learners
to develop knowledge and skills at their own pace at a time and place that is conveni-
ent for them. However, without any interactions with instructors and classmates, learners
may lack self-direction and time-management skills. Developing effective instructor-free
instruction requires developing robust learner guides, embedded scaffolds, immediate
informational feedback, and self-reflection and self-evaluation tools, which are otherwise
typically provided by effective instructors.
    Advanced media. Finally, developing innovative learning environments, such as digi-
tal game-based learning, gamified learning, and virtual reality learning environments, often
requires collaboration among diverse kinds of development specialists. Typically, a large
team is established to carry out a development plan when substantial amounts of advanced
or complex media are included.

Developing Instruction for LCI
The following are some of the kinds of instructional content that need to be developed for
learner-centered instruction.

 a. For projects and applications: the goals, context, resources, etc.
 b. For scaffolding: the generalities, examples, practice, and feedback
 c. Other pieces: guidance for self-evaluation, reflection, project management, course
    management, etc.

As mentioned at the beginning of this chapter, some of your instruction is typically devel-
oped during the design phase, since design and development activities overlap. For exam-
ple, many of your design specifications for a project may be largely what needs to be
                                                                            Development 165
presented to the learners. But some further development will likely be needed to make
sure the project instructions are fully developed from the perspective of the learners. You
might want to use the following questions as a checklist:

•   Are the project goals clearly stated?
•   Does the description of the project provide an authentic or meaningful context?
•   Are the project instructions clear and easy to understand?
•   Are the self-reflection and evaluation processes clearly described?

For those instructors who are inexperienced with the facilitator role in LCI, you could
develop an instructor guide on how to provide effective feedback on learners’ project pro-
cesses and products and how to provide scaffolding for learners. Refer to Chapter 8 for
more information about feedback and other kinds of scaffolding.
   In addition, you may need to develop guidance for self-directed and collaborative learn-
ing for learners (and for instructors to scaffold learners in this kind of learning). Keep in
mind that many learners are still accustomed to passively acquiring information from the
instructor and do not possess knowledge and skills required for successful self-directed
and collaborative learning. They may have difficulty completing a real-world project that
requires them to step out of their comfort zone. In order to better support the learners
in LCI environments, consider developing appropriate guidance for both learners and
instructors on self-directed learning, self-evaluation, reflection, group communication and
collaboration, and project management. We offer more guidance for this at the end of this
chapter.
   In some cases, SMEs actively participate in the development process by writing exam-
ples, practice, feedback, and/or scripts. In other cases, however, instructional designers
are responsible for developing instructional content based on the information provided
by SMEs and/or other sources in the design phase. In such cases, it is important to have
periodic meetings (e.g., weekly or bi-weekly meetings) with SMEs throughout the develop-
ment process, to get feedback on the accuracy of the content.
   In all cases, it is important to conduct frequent formative evaluations throughout the
development process.

Producing Instructional Media
Instructional media refer to objects, print materials, digital resources, or other media
intended to carry out instruction and learner assessment. Some of the media that can be
used to carry out instruction are:

•   Print-based materials
•   PowerPoint files
•   Infographics
•   Videos
•   Interactive multimedia, including animations, computer-based training (CBT),
    computer-based simulations, online instruction, and computer-managed instruction
    (CMI)
•   Objects (procuring actual equipment or materials or developing mock-ups, simula-
    tions, or models of such equipment or materials)
•   Social media (e.g., collaboration tools)
•   Experts (identifying them and making arrangements for their participation)
166 Development
Media production is a time-consuming and exacting task, regardless of the medium that
has been selected. It is essential that quality media be developed, since they are the major
vehicle for learning. Adequate development resources (e.g., developers, programmers, pro-
duction equipment) are required to develop quality instructional media in a timely manner.

Factors to Consider
Production of instructional media may be affected by several factors. The relative impor-
tance of each of these factors depends on the type of media selected. These factors include
development personnel required, development time required, and development funds
required.
   When developing instructional media, make sure:

•   They are appropriate for the design that was specified in the design phase
•   They are developed using appropriate experts in order to create quality instructional
    media
•   They are checked (formatively evaluated) prior to publication/production to ensure
    quality (e.g., for technical accuracy, completeness, programming errors, blurred visuals)
•   They use appropriate vocabulary at the level of the target learners
•   They include appropriate safety precautions
•   Distance learning segments or courses are developed within the parameters of the
    learning management or course management system, if this mode of delivery is
    deemed appropriate for deploying the media

For additional information on development of media, see other resources (Dick, Carey, &
Carey, 2005; Dills & Bass, 1984; Dills & Romiszowski, 1997; Gustafson & Branch, 2002;
Leshin, Pollock, & Reigeluth, 1992; Morrison, Ross, & Kemp, 2007; Romiszowski, 1986,
1988; Smith & Ragan, 2005).

Activities to Do
Instructional media development requires many activities. The type and number of activi-
ties also depend upon the media being developed. Table 9.1 lists some common develop-
ment activities and kinds of team members (roles) required for production of the different
media. Details about formative evaluation are provided in Chapter 10.
   Developing instructional media normally requires teamwork and a diversity of skills.
You, the instructional designer, are responsible for planning, scheduling, and ensuring the
production of the appropriate instructional media.

Development Tools
There are many development tools, including writing tools, graphic design tools (e.g.,
Adobe Photoshop, Adobe Illustrator), video tools (e.g., Adobe Premiere Pro, iMovie),
and e-learning development tools (e.g., Elucidat, Adobe Captivate, Articulate Storyline).
In large ID teams, instructional designers often work with professional media developers
who use highly advanced and sophisticated development tools. When working with pro-
fessional media developers, you may focus on writing instructional content and scripts for
media development. If your ID teams do not include professional media developers, you
may have to develop content and media using less sophisticated tools. In fact, there are
                                                                                      Development 167

Table 9.1 Media Development Activities and Development Roles

Media                    Development Activities                           Development Roles
Print                    Draft/write material                             Subject-matter expert
                         Develop graphics                                 Instructional developer
                         Edit material                                    Editor
                         Formatively evaluate material                    Graphic designer
                         Publish material                                 Evaluator
PowerPoint Files         Draft/write material                             Subject-matter expert
                         Develop graphics                                 Instructional developer
                         Develop animations                               Evaluator
                         Edit material
                         Add narration and timing
                         Formatively evaluate material
Interactive Multimedia   Draft/write Storyboard/script                    Programmer
                         Shoot and edit video                             Script writer
                         Develop graphics                                 Subject-matter expert
                         Record audio                                     Instructional designer
                         Program/code computer                            Video producer and editor
                         Formatively evaluate                             Photographer
                         Publish to the Internet                          Graphic designer
                                                                          Audio technician
                                                                          Evaluator
Objects                  Establish parameters and specifications          Subject-matter expert
                         Identify ones for procurement                    Instructional developer
                         Make any appropriate modifications               Third-party manufacturers
                         Formatively evaluate                             Evaluator
Social Media             Draft/write material and schedule when to post   Subject-matter expert
                         Identify devices for procurement                 Instructional developer
                         Formatively evaluate                             Evaluator
Experts                  Establish parameters                             Subject-matter expert
                         Develop interview questions                      Instructional developer
                         Develop demonstration scenarios                  Evaluator
                         Formatively evaluate


many free development tools that enable designers and educators to easily produce effec-
tive instructional media. In this chapter, we do not address specific tools because tools
evolve so quickly and we seem to encounter new tools every day.

Scriptwriting and Storyboarding
In many ID project situations, instructional designers work with professional media devel-
opers. To develop multimedia, scriptwriting and storyboarding are necessary when work-
ing with such developers. You may have already created a first draft of these during the
design process. Instructional designers typically write two types of scripts: (1) content
scripts including descriptions of media objects and (2) scripts for video scenarios or mul-
timedia presentations.
   First, for the content script, it is helpful to write in a conversational style and make your
sentences concise. Keep in mind that learners should not have to consult an instructor.
168 Development
Your script should provide all the guidance they need, including concrete directions for
interacting with content (e.g., “view the following video to learn about ABC” and “click on
the link below to see XYZ”). If you work with developers, your content scripts also need
to include detailed descriptions of media objects to be included (e.g., images and videos).
   Second, the scripts for video scenarios or other multimedia presentations can take
a variety of forms. For video scenarios involving actors’ dialog, for example, you need
to write narrations, realistic conversations between actors, and descriptions of different
scenes, including the actors’ poses, facial expressions, and gestures, whereas you simply
write narrations and descriptions of images for the videos made of still images.
   A storyboard is a series of sketches or illustrations displayed in sequence. It is used to
help developers visualize the animations, videos, or interactive multimedia to be devel-
oped. In some cases, you might develop a storyboard first and then write scripts, while in
other cases, you write scripts first and then develop a storyboard. It is also possible to do
both concurrently.
   Again, formative evaluation should be conducted frequently for the scripts and
storyboards.

General Guidelines for Graphic Design
Graphic design refers to “a plan for organizing visual objects in space” for the purpose
of communication. Good graphic design captures attention, guides the eye’s move-
ment across the page or screen, conveys information, and evokes appropriate emotion
(Golombisky & Hagen, 2013). On the other hand, ineffective graphic design can result in
confusion, misunderstanding, and frustration. Table 9.2 lists five common layout mistakes
novice designers make in developing visual materials and ways to avoid the mistakes.
    In order to create effective visuals, you need to understand the basics of graphic design,
including principles and theories of design (see e.g., Lidwell, Holden & Butler, 2010) and
general guidelines for choosing fonts and colors and for working with photos and illustra-
tions. Table 9.3 lists four basic design principles (Williams, 2015).
    For additional information on graphic design, we recommend reading such books as
White Space Is Not Your Enemy: A Beginner’s Guide to Communicating Visually through Graphic,
Web & Multimedia Design, The Non-Designer’s Design Book: Design and Typographic Principles for
the Visual Novice, and Universal Principles of Design.


Table 9.2 Common Layout Mistakes and Ways to Avoid Them

Common Layout      Best Practice
Mistakes
Centering          Avoid centered alignment. While centered content can create a formal look, it also
  everything         creates visual flow issues. Left or right aligned layouts give the viewer’s eye a nice
                     straight vertical line on the right or the left to follow top to bottom. With centered
                     alignment, the eye bounces around in search of the next eye entry point.
Cluttering the     Group items together that belong together rather than spreading out your content to
   corners           fill every corner.
Too many fonts     Choose one font that is generic and readable for the main text, and choose a second font
                     that contrasts for use in headlines or subheads. Try to stick to two fonts per layout.
Busy backgrounds Make sure that the background doesn’t interfere with your visual communication.
Using all caps     Do not use all caps for body copy.
                                                                                     Development 169

Table 9.3 Four Basic Design Principles

Design Principle   Design Tips
Proximity          • If items are related to each other, group them into closer proximity.
                   • Separate items that are not directly related to each other.
                   • Avoid too many separate elements on a page. If there are more than three to five
                     elements on a page, see which of them can be grouped together.
Alignment          • Every element should have some visual connection with another element on the page.
                   • Avoid using more than one text alignment on the page.
                   • Choose a centered alignment carefully and rarely.
Repetition         • Think of repetition as being consistent.
                   • Repeat some aspects of the design throughout the entire piece.
                   • Avoid repeating an element so much that it becomes annoying or overwhelming.
Contrast           • If two items are not exactly the same, then make them different.
                   • Add contrast through typeface choices, colors, shapes, sizes, line thickness, etc.
                   • Avoid using two or more typefaces that are similar.



  Again, frequent formative evaluations should be conducted during the graphic design
process.

Guidelines for Developing Technology-Enhanced Instruction
Clark and Mayer’s basic principles of multimedia learning provide research-based guide-
lines for developing a wide variety of technology-based instruction, including e-learning
training and multimedia instruction (Clark & Mayer, 2008; Mayer, 2005). Table 9.4 lists the
principles, along with descriptions and guidelines for each, but it is important to keep in
mind that exceptions are occasionally appropriate.
   Formative evaluation should be conducted throughout the process of developing tech-
nology-enhanced instruction.

Developing a Learner Guide
Once the instruction has been designed, a learner guide (e.g., course syllabus) should be
prepared to give the learner a big-picture view of the instruction (content and methods),
along with guidance about how to navigate the instructional system. For instructor-cen-
tered instruction, a course syllabus is the standard learner guide. See Merrill (2020) for guid-
ance on syllabi for teacher-centered, problem-centered instruction. For learner-centered
instruction, a different format, called a plan of instruction or a learning plan, is more helpful.
Although each kind of learner guide can be in different formats, they are normally organ-
ized by modules of instruction and contain the following information:

•    Course/workshop/project description
•    Learner objectives and standards
•    How to navigate the online instruction
•    Preferred instructional sequence
•    Instructional hours and approximate allocations of those hours to units (e.g., modules
     or projects)
•    Instructional methods
170 Development

Table 9.4 Basic Principles of Multimedia Learning

Principles      Descriptions                                                Guidelines
Multimedia      • People learn better from words and pictures than from     • Include both words and
  Principle       words alone.                                                graphics.
Spatial         • People learn more deeply from a multimedia message        • Place printed words near
   Contiguity     when corresponding words and pictures are presented         corresponding graphics.
   Principle      near rather than far from each other on the page or
                  screen.
Temporal        • People learn more deeply from a multimedia message        • Synchronize spoken words
  Contiguity      when corresponding animation and narration are              with corresponding graphics.
  Principle       presented simultaneously rather than successively.
Modality        • Presenting information in a mixed mode (partly visual     • Present words as speech
  Principle       and partly auditory) is more effective than presenting      rather than on-screen text.
                  the same information in a single mode (either visual or
                  auditory alone).
Redundancy      • People learn more deeply from graphics and narration      • Do not add on-screen text to
  Principle       than from graphics, narration, and on-screen text.          narrated graphics.
                Note: an exception is that information that is redundant
                  for one person may be essential for another. For
                  example, you may need to add on-screen text to
                  narrative graphics if your audience includes learners
                  who have trouble processing spoken words. Also,
                  accessibility requirements may mandate including
                  on-screen text.
Coherence       • People learn more deeply from a multimedia message        • Avoid instruction with
  Principle       when extraneous material is excluded rather than            extraneous audio, graphics,
                  included.                                                   and words.
Signaling       • People learn more deeply from a multimedia message        • Use cues (e.g., arrows,
   Principle      when cues are added that highlight the critical aspects     circles, bold fonts, different
                  of the presented information.                               colors) to highlight
                                                                              important information.
Personalization • People learn more deeply when the words in a              • Use conversational rather
   Principle      multimedia presentation are in conversational style         than formal style.
                  rather than formal style.
Voice Principle • People learn more deeply when the words in a            • Put words in human voice
                  multimedia message are spoken in a standard-accented      rather than machine voice.
                  human voice rather than in a machine voice.
Segmenting      • People learn more deeply when a multimedia message • Break a continuous lesson
   Principle      is presented in learner-paced segments rather than as a   into bite-size segments that
                  continuous unit.                                          learners can tackle at their
                                                                            own pace.
Pretraining     • People learn more deeply from a multimedia message • Ensure that learners know
   Principle      when they know the names and characteristics of the       the names and characteristics
                  main concepts.                                            of key concepts before
                                                                            engaging in the activity.
                                                                              Development 171
•   Procedures
•   Where to find learning resources and tools
•   Evaluation criteria and/or rubrics for self-evaluation
•   Support materials
•   Media utilization

The learner guide should be adapted to various instructional situations to meet the needs
of the learners. However, there are several basic or general guidelines that apply to all
learner guides. They should:

•   Be easy to understand/use
•   Document the plan of instruction
•   Provide adequate information
•   Be easily maintained
•   Vary in format based on the preference of the learners and the organization providing
    the instruction

Developing an Instructor Guide
An instructor guide, often called a facilitator guide for LCI or lesson plans for ICI, pro-
vides detailed information for an instructor to implement the instruction. For LCI, since
many instructors are inexperienced with this approach (An & Reigeluth, 2011), they will
be inclined to teach in traditional ways even with good problem-based learning (PBL)
problems (An, 2013) or authentic projects. Therefore, the facilitator guide must help them
overcome that tendency and include guidance for facilitating a learner-centered project or
activity, including scaffolding strategies and support for self-directed learning, collabora-
tive learning, and project management.
    The lesson plans for ICI, on the other hand, usually include learning objectives, proce-
dures, and directions for a lecture, demonstrations, discussions, media use, assessments,
etc. How detailed your lesson plans should be depends on the instructor’s experience and
familiarity with the content and media used. In some cases, a simple checklist can be suf-
ficient, while other situations may require a very detailed guide including scripts.
    The instructor guide should also be formatively evaluated.

Formative Evaluation, Revision, and Finalization
The products developed in this phase should be formatively evaluated as they are devel-
oped, rather than evaluating them all at the end of this phase. Due to time and budgetary
constraints, it may be helpful to sort the evaluation results by priority (e.g., have to change,
should change, and cannot change at this time). Throughout this phase, you should also be
continuously evaluating the ID process activities you use. This is a form of “reflection on
action” (Donald A. Schön, 1987; Donald A. Schön, 1995). Once formative evaluation has
been completed and revisions have been made, the media should be finalized for imple-
mentation. During finalization, ensure that all of the last-minute changes have been made
to the media and they are ready for use.
   It is important to finalize all the media prior to implementing instruction to ensure that
they are: current and accurate, complete, and ready to use in the teaching-learning activity.
The types and numbers of different media that are developed for a course should deter-
mine what needs to be done during finalization of the media. An easy way to ensure that all
172 Development

Table 9.5 Job Aid for Finalizing Instructional Media

Media                                 Finalization Questions
Printed                               Have student workbooks been updated?
                                      Are student workbooks complete?
                                      Have student workbooks been published?
                                      Have the lesson plans been updated?
                                      Are the lesson plans complete?
                                      Have the lesson plans been approved and published?
Interactive Multimedia                Have the programs been updated?
                                      Are the programs complete?
                                      Have the programs been operationally tested?
                                      Are the programs ready for use?
Objects                               Have the objects been procured?
                                      Have the objects been modified (if appropriate)?
                                      Has the use of the objects been operationally tested?



media are finalized is to develop a job aid consisting of questions on specific areas such as
plans and control documents. Table 9.5 shows a sample job aid for finalizing instructional
media after they have been formatively evaluated and revised.
    As the development phase is concluded, it is likely that the ID project management
plan, which was last updated during the design phase, may again require updating to keep
it current and accurate. If the plan is to remain an effective management tool, it should be
updated continually so that it provides a roadmap for managing the remainder of the ID
project. Some of the information in the plan that may require updating as a result of the
development phase is project milestones, resource requirements, and resource constraints.

Where Are We?
This chapter has offered guidance for the third D in the Holistic 4D Model – Develop. It
described how the development process varies depending on the type of instruction and
the development staff and resources available. Then it offered guidance for developing
instruction for LCI and for producing instructional media, scriptwriting and storyboard-
ing, graphic design, developing technology-enhanced instruction, and developing a learner
guide and an instructor guide. Finally, the chapter emphasized the importance of frequent
formative evaluation and revisions throughout the development process.
   The next chapter (Chapter 10) provides guidance for formative evaluation, which is
conducted throughout the ID process on all four Ds in the Holistic 4D Model. The fourth
D, Deploy, is addressed in Chapters 11–12.

Exercises
Here again we offer suggestions for a professor using this book as a textbook in a course,
to help the students understand more deeply the contents of this chapter. We suggest that
you keep the same teams of about three students each to continue to work on their ID
projects throughout the course. However, these exercises can be done individually by any
reader who wants to deepen their understanding and skills.
                                                                                                     Development 173
 1. Have each team develop and formatively evaluate the instruction on at least two of
    the lessons they designed in the Chapter 8 Exercises. If time is a factor, each team
    could create a formative evaluation plan rather than actually conducting a formative
    evaluation and preparing an evaluation report. For what you consider to be the best
    lessons, we suggest you get written permission from the students to use them as
    examples in the next offering of your course.
 2. Have each team offer suggestions for improvement for the lessons and evaluation
    plans or reports of one or two other teams before you review and provide feedback
    to the students.
 3. Have a whole-class, synchronous discussion of the strengths and weaknesses of this
    development and formative-evaluation process, including any difficulties or chal-
    lenges they faced during the process and what changes to the process might have
    helped. We would love to get your suggestions for improvement.

References
An, Y. (2013). Systematic design of blended PBL: Exploring the design experiences and support needs of PBL
   novices in an online environment. Contemporary Issues in Technology and Teacher Education, 13(1). Retrieved
   from       http://www.citejournal.org/volume-13/issue-1-13/general/systematic-design-of-blended-pbl-e
   xploring-the-design-experiences-and-support-needs-of-pbl-novices-in-an-online-environment/.
An, Y., & Reigeluth, C.M. (2011). Creating technology-enhanced, learner-centered classrooms: K-12 teachers’
   beliefs, perceptions, barriers, and support needs. Journal of Digital Learning in Teacher Education, 28(2), 54–62.
Clark, R.C., & Mayer, R.E. (2008). e-Learning and the science of instruction: Proven guidelines for consumers and designers
   of multimedia learning. San Francisco, CA: Pfeiffer.
Dick, W., Carey, L., & Carey, J.O. (2005). The systematic design of instruction (5th ed.). Boston: Pearson/Allyn and
   Bacon.
Dills, C.R., & Bass, R.K. (Eds.). (1984). Instructional development: The state of the art. Dubuque, IA: Kendall/Hunt
   Pub. Co.
Dills, C.R., & Romiszowski, A.J. (Eds.). (1997). Instructional development paradigms. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
   Educational Technology Publications.
Golombisky, K., & Hagen, R. (2013). White space is not your enemy: A beginner's guide to communicating visually through
   graphic, web & multimedia design. New York: Taylor & Francis.
Gustafson, K.L., & Branch, R.M. (2002). Survey of instructional development models (4th ed.). Syracuse, NY:
   ERIC Clearinghouse on Information & Technology.
Leshin, C.B., Pollock, J., & Reigeluth, C.M. (1992). Instructional design strategies and tactics. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
   Educational Technology Publications.
Lidwell, W., Holden, K., & Butler, J. (2010). Universal principles of design. Beverly, MA: Rockport Publishers.
Mayer, R.E. (2005). Cognitive theory of multimedia learning. The Cambridge handbook of multimedia learning, 41,
   31–48.
Merrill, M.D. (2020). A syllabus review check-list to promote problem-centered instruction. TechTrends, 64(1),
   105–123.
Morrison, G.R., Ross, S.M., & Kemp, J.E. (2007). Designing effective instruction (5th ed.). Hoboken, NJ: J. Wiley.
Romiszowski, A.J. (1986). Developing auto-instructional materials: From programmed texts to CAL and interactive video.
   New York, NY: Nichols Publishing.
Romiszowski, A.J. (1988). The selection and use of instructional media: For improved classroom teaching and for interactive,
   individualized instruction (2nd ed.). New York: Nichols Pub.
Schön, D.A. (1987). Educating the reflective practitioner: Toward a new design for teaching and learning in the professions.
   San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Schön, D.A. (1995). The reflective practitioner: How professionals think in action. Aldershot, England: Arena.
Smith, P.L., & Ragan, T.J. (2005). Instructional design (3rd ed.). Hoboken, NJ: J. Wiley & Sons.
Williams, R. (2015). The non-designer’s design book (4th ed.). Berkeley, CA: Peachpit Press.
10 Formative Evaluation




Overview
There are two major kinds of evaluation: formative and summative. And there are two
basic times that evaluation can be done: while the instruction is being developed (which we
call developmental evaluation and is always formative) and after implementation of instruction
(which we call operational evaluation and can be either formative or summative). Formative
evaluation has two purposes: one that evaluates and improves the products that result
from the instructional design (ID) process (called product evaluation, which can be either
developmental or operational), and one that evaluates and improves the ID process itself
(called process evaluation, which is always developmental).
    Summative evaluation also has two parts: one that takes place immediately after imple-
mentation (called initial summative evaluation) and one that takes place periodically throughout
the life of the instructional system (called continuing summative evaluation or confirmation evalu-
ation). The various kinds of evaluation are shown in Table 10.1.
    The purpose of formative evaluation is to improve either your instructional product or
your ID process. Formative evaluation ensures that:

•   The instruction meets training or education requirements
•   The instruction is effective and efficient
•   Equipment satisfies operational, training, and support requirements
•   Facilities meet operational, training, and support requirements
•   Instructional design, development, and revision activities are effective and efficient

  This chapter offers guidance for all three kinds of formative evaluation. Guidance for
summative evaluation is provided in Chapter 12.

Developing a Formative Evaluation Plan
A preliminary plan for formative evaluation should be created during the initial project
planning process as part of the ID PM plan (see Chapter 2), and it should be updated
throughout the ID process.
                                                                             Formative Evaluation 175

Table 10.1 Kinds of Evaluation

                 Formative Evaluation                  Summative Evaluation
                 Product Evaluation     Process        Initial                 Continuing
                                        Evaluation
Developmental Developmental             Formative
                Formative Product         Process
                Evaluation                Evaluation
Operational   Operational Formative                    Initial Operational     Continuing Operational
                Product Evaluation                        Summative              Summative
                                                          Evaluation             Evaluation


Formative Product Evaluation Plan
Developmental and operational formative product evaluations differ primarily in when
each is conducted. The methods are largely the same for both. A formative product evalu-
ation plan may contain such information as:

•   What kind(s) of formative evaluation to conduct (e.g., expert reviews, individual tryouts,
    alpha and beta tests, small-group tryouts, and operational tryouts) for each product
•   How to conduct each kind of evaluation
•   Who will conduct each kind of evaluation
•   When to conduct the evaluations
•   Evaluation schedule constraints
•   Number and availability of experts or learners to be involved in the evaluations
•   Criteria for evaluation
•   How the results should be documented
•   How problems should be resolved

   The formative product evaluation plan should be updated periodically to include new
or revised information, such as:

•   Changes in the evaluation plan for the next phase
•   Revisions to the evaluation schedules
•   Rationale for changes made to the evaluation plan
•   Lessons learned during the latest evaluations

Formative Process Evaluation Plan
Formative process evaluation ensures quality in all phases of the ID process, to ensure
process quality, while continually seeking improvements within each activity. Process eval-
uation enables you to improve your ID process as it proceeds. A process evaluation plan
may contain such information as:

•   How the ID activities will be evaluated
•   Who will conduct the evaluation
•   When to conduct the evaluations
•   Evaluation schedule constraints
176 Formative Evaluation
•   Other data sources for each activity being evaluated
•   How the results should be documented
•   How problems should be resolved

Much of this information may need to be added to the preliminary plan just before each
activity is evaluated. Nevertheless, everyone conducting an activity in any phase should
constantly seek to collect data about what is working well, what is not working well, and
how to improve it.
   The process evaluation plan should be updated periodically to include new or revised
information, such as:

•   Changes in the evaluation plan for the next phase
•   Revisions to the evaluation schedules
•   Rationale for changes made to the evaluation plan
•   Lessons learned during the latest evaluations

Conducting a Formative Product Evaluation
Several methods are used for conducting a formative product evaluation: expert reviews,
individual tryouts, alpha and beta tests, small-group tryouts, and operational tryouts (see
Table 10.2).

Expert Reviews
The expert review is typically the first step of the formative evaluation process. There are
two kinds of expert review. The most common is a content review by a subject-matter
expert (SME). Often, it is also helpful to conduct an instructional methods review with an
expert in the instructional methods you have chosen, especially for large ID projects. This
could be an instructor experienced in teaching the methods to your target learners, for they

Table 10.2 Methods for Conducting Formative Product Evaluation

                   Participants                       Focus
Expert Reviews     Chosen SMEs and experts in the     Content accuracy
                     instructional method             Instructional quality
Individual         Several learners from the target   Clarity, sequencing, and usability of the instruction
  Tryouts             learner population              Problems and difficulties encountered
                                                      Time required
                                                      Learners’ views about the instruction
Alpha Tests        SMEs                               Accuracy of the instruction
Beta Tests         A sample of target learners        Usability of the interface
                                                      Instructional integrity
Small-Group        Small groups of learners           Time required
  Tryouts                                             Quality of instruction
Operational        Learners and instructors           Operational effectiveness
  Tryouts                                             Learning gains
                                                      Duration of instruction
                                                      Learners’ views of instruction
                                                      Instructors’ views of instruction
                                                                      Formative Evaluation 177
are experts in both the content and teaching it to your target learners. Be sure to get input
from the experts on what changes they think would likely improve the content and design,
and either make revisions during the walk-through exercise, or as soon as possible after it.
The earlier in the ID process that a problem is identified and fixed, the less expensive and
time-consuming the ID process will be.
   If possible, conduct content reviews on all content selection decisions. It may be easier
to manage with busy SMEs if you give them a sizable chunk of content to review at once.
For a methods review, we recommend evaluating any given decision before you make
a similar decision for other parts of the instruction, so you won’t have to make the same
revisions for those other parts later. Quantitative rapid prototyping is well-suited to this
process. On each of the three levels of the Holistic 4D design process, we have indicated
points at which formative evaluation should be conducted (see Table 10.3).
   There are many ways to review products for accuracy, completeness, quality, and suit-
ability. The bottom line is to cross-check the products against the experts’ opinions, the
data sources available (such as technical orders, regulations, directives, and checklists), and
learners’ reactions. One method of helping conduct the review is to develop useful ques-
tions to ask the experts. Sample questions include the following:

•   Is the content accurate and current?
•   Is the content consistent with the learner’s needs?
•   What are the “high quality” parts of the product?
•   Are there any “low quality” parts in the product?
•   How can the product be improved?

When conducting a review, the experts should: take careful notes, make specific com-
ments, identify weaknesses in the products, and recommend ways to improve the prod-
ucts. After the review, the experts and you should discuss their review findings, determine
what revisions or changes should be made to the products, decide the best way to make
the necessary corrections to the products, and make revisions and changes to the products,
as applicable. It is often impossible to address all comments from experts. It is recom-
mended to prioritize feedback from experts and decide what must be changed, should be
changed, and cannot be changed.

Individual Tryouts
Conducting individual tryouts is normally the next step in the formative evaluation pro-
cess as soon as you have instruction in a form that can be shared with target learners. As
the instruction is being designed and developed, small segments or units are tried out on
individual learners from the target learner population and improved when possible. The
instruction should be tried out on several learners, if practical, because learners differ in
their instructional needs and preferences. It may not always be possible to conduct indi-
vidual tryouts due to resource constraints, but they can greatly improve the quality of the
instruction, and problems are less expensive to fix at this point in the ID process.
   A great deal of care should be used when selecting learners to participate in the indi-
vidual tryouts. Learners selected for the tryouts should:

•   Be evenly distributed between low and high aptitudes
•   Have representatively diverse skill levels
•   Come from representatively diverse backgrounds
178 Formative Evaluation

Table 10.3 ADE Process for Task Expertise and Topic Expertise (Differences Are in Bold)

           Task Expertise                                     Topic Expertise
Top        1. Select and sequence top-level content           1. Select and sequence top-level content
  Level    2. Plan high-level instructional methods           2. Plan high-level instructional methods
  Ch. 5    3. Formatively evaluate and document the           3. Formatively evaluate and document the
              top-level design                                   top-level design
Mid        1. Identify and sequence versions of each          1. Identify and sequence applications of
  Level       task                                               each topic
  Ch. 6    2. Identify variations within each version and     2. Identify variations within each application
              create designer objectives                         and create designer objectives
           3. Formatively evaluate the findings               3. Formatively evaluate the findings
           4. Develop the learner objectives for each         4. Develop the learner objectives for each
              version                                            topic
           5. Design learner assessments for each version     5. Design learner assessments for each topic
           6. Design the ways that learning by doing will     6. Design the ways that learning by doing will
              be accomplished for each version                   be accomplished for each topic
           7. Select media in general for the version         7. Select media in general for the application
           8. Formatively evaluate and document the           8. Formatively evaluate and document the
              results                                            results
Lower      1. Select and sequence the organizing content      1. Select and sequence the organizing content
  Level       for each version of the task                       for each topic
  Ch. 7    2. Select and classify the supporting content      2. Select and classify the supporting content
              for each version                                   for each topic
           3. Sequence the supporting content for each        3. Sequence the supporting content for each
              version                                            topic
           4. Evaluate and document the findings              4. Evaluate and document the findings
           5. Identify resource requirements, availability,   5. Identify resource requirements, availability,
              and existing instruction for each version          and existing instruction for each topic
           6. Revise and elaborate the instruction and        6. Revise and elaborate the instruction and
              assessments for each version                       assessments for each topic
           7. Formatively evaluate the ADE document           7. Formatively evaluate the ADE document
           8. Begin developing the implementation plan,       8. Begin developing the implementation plan,
              and update the project management plan             and update the project management plan
   Ch. 8   Detailed guidance is provided for Lower-Level Step 6: Revise and Elaborate the Instruction
           and Assessments for Each Version/Topic. It includes instructional strategies for:
             • Remembering information
             • Understanding relationships
             • Applying skills and higher-order skills
             • Acting on attitudes or values



If learners do not represent the range of diversity of the target learners, tryout results can
be skewed. Thus, revisions may not be helpful for all the target learners and could make
the instruction worse for some.
    We recommend beginning by designing lean instruction (instruction that assumes the
learner does not need much instructional support to master the content), because it is less
expensive to add more instructional support to make a lesson easier, than to delete some
instruction to make it more appropriately lean. (Any unnecessary instructional support you
end up removing is expensive because of the extra time it took to create it in the first place,
                                                                                   Formative Evaluation 179
plus the extra time to remove it. In contrast, starting lean and adding it later does not really
take much more time than if you had included it from the beginning.) Often, this entails
evaluating some instruction in a preliminary form, or “mock-up,” because the earlier you
catch problems, the less expensive it is to correct them, and it helps you to avoid creating
similar problems in your future design work.
   The nature of the tryout should depend, to some degree, on the media selected for use
in the course. (Remember that “medium” refers to all means by which instruction is deliv-
ered, including instructors, digital media, print materials, and real-world objects.) Certain
types of media may be too expensive for use during the individual tryouts, or they may
not be available. However, there are ways to evaluate the instruction without using the
intended media. Table 10.4 shows some examples.
   Before conducting the individual tryouts, you should prepare the learners for the try-
outs. Learners need to know:
•    The purpose of the tryout
•    They are not being evaluated – the instruction is
•    Their role in the tryout
•    Their active participation is essential if the individual tryout is to be successful
•    Their feedback is necessary in determining ways to improve the instruction

During the individual tryouts, you should:
•    Closely observe learners as they go through the instruction
•    Make careful note of where learners seem to have problems or uncertainties
•    Give assistance to learners only when it is essential to learner progress
•    Administer the relevant test items at the appropriate time
•    Get the learners’ views about the difficulties encountered during the tryout and how
     best to address them

Sources of individual-tryout information are provided in Table 10.5.
  Often, the following problems are identified during the first tryouts:
•    Improper sequencing of the instruction
•    Instruction not clear and concise
•    Lack of supporting instructional media
•    Confusing test items
•    Test items that do not measure objectives
•    Insufficient practice time

Table 10.4 Media Use during Tryouts

If Media Selected Are …                              Conduct Individual Tryout by …
Available, such as job aids, simulators, trainers, or Using the actual media that will be used in the course.
Capable of being quickly and economically
  developed, such as paper-based materials,
  slides, graphics
Not available, or                                    Devising storyboard versions of the instruction. For
Dangerous to use, or                                   example, paper script with drawings can be used in
Expensive to develop                                   place of multimedia, and mockups can be used to
                                                       replace the actual media.
180 Formative Evaluation

Table 10.5 Sources of Data for Individual Tryouts

Source                 Activity
Diagnostic tests      • Administer a pretest to identify entry knowledge and behavior.
                      • Administer a posttest to assess learning as a result of the tryout.
Learner performance • Observe and record learners' performance.
   during instruction • Determine which exercises or tasks result in errors, types of errors made, and how
                        many learners are making the same error(s).
Learner comments      • Get learner reaction to the instruction and materials, especially their difficulties.
                      • Ask learners for suggestions on how the instruction and materials can be
                        improved.


After a tryout, you need to analyze the resulting data to determine if error patterns or prob-
lems have occurred on successive tryouts. If so, changes or revisions to the instruction or
test are appropriate. For example, if each learner participating in the individual tryouts fails
to meet the performance standard for a particular objective, you should review the objec-
tive, instruction, and test, and revise as necessary. In most cases, several tryouts should be
conducted before making any significant revisions or changes to the instruction or test.
When significant revisions are required in the instruction or test, we recommend that addi-
tional individual tryouts again be conducted in order to determine if the problem was solved.

Small-Group Tryouts for Group-Based Instruction
If the instruction is going to be conducted in groups when implemented, after the individ-
ual tryouts have been completed and all necessary revisions have been made, it is advisable
to conduct the next stage of formative evaluation, which is small-group tryouts. Small-
group tryouts are not needed if the instruction does not include any group work. The
instruction and tests are tried out on small groups of learners. Up to this point, the evalu-
ation of the instruction has been based on a small sample of learners. Small-group tryouts
are focused on the full range of target learners under conditions approximating the actual
teaching-learning situation. It may not always be possible to conduct small-group tryouts
due to resource constraints, but they can greatly improve the quality of the instruction,
and problems are less expensive to fix at this point in the ID process.
   Learner selection for a small-group tryout is very important. See the criteria for select-
ing learners for individual tryouts. Representativeness of learners helps determine if the
instruction and tests will be effective under implementation conditions. The number of
learners included in the small groups should be determined based on factors such as:

•    Need for teams of learners within the target instructional context (for example, some
     tasks may require learners to work in teams of three; if so, the small-group size should
     be based on multiples of three)
•    Planned normal group size, if any, for the target instructional context (e.g., classroom
     size)
•    Availability of equipment for the tryout
•    Availability of facilities for the tryout

Up to this point in the formative evaluation process, time required for learners to master
a task or topic has not been of major concern, because the instruction has been frequently
                                                                       Formative Evaluation 181
interrupted by formative evaluation activities. However, time becomes a critical factor in
the small-group tryouts. Learning the material or performing a task successfully is not suf-
ficient; learners should be able to master what is required within a reasonable time period.
Therefore, effort should be made to ensure that learning can be accomplished within any
time constraints based on training requirements and the capability of the slowest learners.
For individualized instruction, this should be done during the beta test.
    Before a small-group tryout, you should:
•   Determine the number of learners to include in each small group
•   Determine the number of small groups to use in the tryouts
•   Select a broad range of representative learners from the target learners
•   Ensure that the instruction and tests have been revised based on the applicable infor-
    mation resulting from individual tryouts
•   Ensure that learner materials are available in adequate quantities
•   Ensure that instructional resources such as equipment, personnel, and facilities to be
    used during the tryout approximate the operational conditions
•   Ensure that the course management system is operating and can collect, analyze, and
    report data, if possible

During a small-group tryout, you should:
•   Ensure that the time required for each learner to complete the instruction and/or
    test is accurately recorded. This information is used to determine the size (amount of
    content) of projects, modules, and courses.
•   Record the levels of learner performance. This information should help determine
    deficiencies in the instruction or assessments.
•   Establish the number of trials a slow learner needs to meet performance requirements.
•   Let the instruction stand on its own. Supplementing the instruction or assisting on
    tests may skew the results of the tryout.

You should conduct a sufficient number of small-group tryouts to improve the quality of
your instruction and assessments. One rule of thumb is to continue tryouts until you no
longer get useful information, but resource constraints may preclude this.
   After each tryout, the data collected should be analyzed to determine:
•   The maximum time required to complete each project, module, or other unit of
    instruction. (This information is used to set the approximate times for each unit, or to
    adjust the size of each to fit the time slots available.)
•   The need to revise equipment requirements, make changes to facilities, and adjust
    personnel requirements.
•   Revisions warranted in instruction and assessments.
•   Priority for accomplishing revisions and plan of accomplishment.

As with the individual tryout, if the instruction or assessments require significant revisions or
changes, we recommend that additional small-group tryouts be conducted on the revisions.

Operational Formative Product Evaluation
The operational formative product evaluation, often called a “pilot test,” is conducted
under normal instructional conditions by an instructor and developer. It normally takes
182 Formative Evaluation
place for an entire course (or other autonomous unit of instruction). It evaluates the
instructional system's operational effectiveness, maintainability, supportability, and suit-
ability. It identifies any operational and logistic support deficiencies and any needed
modifications. In addition, the operational tryout provides information on organizational
structure, personnel requirements, support equipment, policies, training, and tactics. It
should also provide data to verify operating instructions, maintenance procedures, training
programs, publications, and handbooks. Its purposes are to:

•       Ensure that all four functions of the instructional system (delivery, management, sup-
        port, and administration – see Chapter 11) work well under implementation conditions
•       Make further revisions or refinements to all four functions of the instructional system
        based on feedback from managers, instructors, and a large sample of the target learners
•       Work out any implementation or operational problems, such as equipment and facilities

For operational tryouts, learners are selected from the target population to participate,
using the normal learner scheduling process. Operational tryout data are collected before,
during, and after the instruction is provided.
• Before conducting instruction, the instructional designer or instructor should:
    ο Determine if learners have met course prerequisites and identify their entry skill
         and knowledge levels
    ο Collect data using such methods as pretest, oral examination, or directly asking
         learners if they have specific skills and knowledge
• While conducting instruction, the instructional developer or instructor should identify
    breakdowns in instruction, check learner progress, and record duration of instruction
• After conducting instruction, the instructional developer or instructor should admin-
    ister the posttest, interview learners, and critique the instruction

The data collection is summarized in Table 10.6.
  Before an operational tryout, ensure that:

•       Resources are available, such as equipment, facilities, and instructors
•       Instruction and tests have been revised based on the results of previous formative
        evaluation activities
•       Materials are available in adequate quantities
•       Learners have been scheduled to participate
•       Size of the tryout group is compatible with actual implementation conditions
Table 10.6 Stages of Data Collection

Stage          Data to Be Collected                                           Data Collection Methods
Before         Learner entry skill/knowledge level                            Pretest
                                                                              Oral examination
                                                                              Learner interviews
During         Number of errors learners make                                 Observation
               Questions raised by learners                                   Recording learner questions
               Learner work samples                                           Collecting work samples
               Duration of instruction
After          Learner learning gains                                         Posttest
               Learner views of instruction, materials                        Learner interviews, critiques
               Instructor’s or supervisor’s views of instruction, materials   Instructor interviews, critiques
                                                                        Formative Evaluation 183
During an operational tryout, you should:

•   Ensure that instruction is conducted in the normal implementation environment
•   Collect data such as time requirements, test results, instructor and learner comments,
    and problem areas, using adequate data samples to ensure valid and reliable data

After an operational tryout. When an adequate number of operational tryouts has been
conducted, you should:

•   Analyze data gathered during the tryouts
•   Revise all four functions of the instructional system as necessary
•   Continue cycles of tryout and revision as long as the quality of the instructional system
    is in need of improvement and resources allow

Alpha and Beta Tests for e-Learning
In the e-learning field, you often hear the terms alpha test and beta test. Both alpha and
beta tests are conducted to formatively evaluate e-learning before you actually implement
it. However, they have different purposes and are conducted in different phases. The
alpha test takes place during the development phase when the first working draft of the
instruction (often referred to as an alpha version) is complete (though often before full
media development) in order to ensure accuracy and quality of the instruction. SMEs are
the primary participants for the alpha test, but target learners may also be brought in at
this point to see how they react to the instruction and better understand their perspectives.
    On the other hand, the beta test takes place once the instruction has been polished into
something closely resembling the final version and is done with a representative sample of
target learners. It is a kind of operational tryout. Because the beta test is the last step before
the release of the e-learning product, it is critical to get input from a representative sample of
actual users of the instruction. The beta test has multiple purposes: to gather feedback on the
usability of the interface, to ensure instructional integrity, and to find errors (Lesniak, 2002).
However, it is recommended to have editorial and technical reviews completed by editors
before beta tests so that learners can focus on learning, not on finding typos, broken links,
and other errors. The beta test usually takes about twice as long as the actual instruction
because you often stop during the beta test to receive feedback from representative learners
(Piskurich, 2015). So, you need to schedule enough time and let your participants know that
the beta test will take longer than the expected learning time. When e-learning will take place
individually rather than in small groups, no small-group tryouts will be conducted, so you
should finish your beta testing by determining how long the instruction typically takes with a
sample of the target audience, and make sure the modules are of appropriate length.

Using the Kirkpatrick Model for Formative Evaluation
The Kirkpatrick model, developed by Donald Kirkpatrick, has been widely used to evalu-
ate training and educational programs. The model consists of four levels:

•   Level 1: Reaction
•   Level 2: Learning
•   Level 3: Behavior
•   Level 4: Results
184 Formative Evaluation
Level 1, Reaction, measures the degree to which learners find the training favorable, engag-
ing, and relevant to their jobs or lives. Level 2, Learning, measures the degree to which
learners acquire the intended knowledge, skills, attitudes, confidence, and commitment
based on their participation in the training. Level 3, Behavior, measures the degree to which
participants apply what they learned during instruction when they are back in the real world.
Finally, Level 4, Results, measures the degree to which targeted outcomes occur as a result
of the instruction and any related interventions (e.g., support and incentives) (Kirkpatrick
Partners, 2018). Levels 1 (reaction) and 2 (learning) are used most often for formative eval-
uation, but Levels 3 (behavior) and 4 (results) could also be used in some situations.

Level 1: Evaluating Participant Reaction
This looks at what learners and instructors (and for training contexts, managers) thought
and felt about the quality of instruction for the purpose of improving its quality. Table 10.7
shows an example of a questionnaire designed to obtain learner feedback.
   After the data are collected and analyzed, the next stage is to correct deficiencies in the
instruction. Due to resource constraints, it is often necessary to prioritize the improve-
ments and work your way down the list until resources run out. Revisions should be made
as soon as possible to receive the greatest benefit from the changes.

Level 2: Evaluating Learning
This level of evaluation determines the specific learning that occurred (information, under-
standings, skills, and attitudes) through learner assessments and compares it to the learning
requirements (goals and objectives). It is important to collect sufficient assessment data
for the analysis, since insufficient data may skew the analysis results, possibly leading to
poor decisions. Several methods of collecting the data are listed in Table 10.8.
   Before beginning analysis of the data, ensure that data have been collected from each
unit of the instruction and that an adequate number of data samples has been collected
in order to validate the reliability of the findings. During data analysis, review assessment
data to ensure that learners are meeting course objectives and to determine if assessment
methods are valid and reliable. After data analysis, identify specific parts of the course
that are not working well, use participant reactions to identify ways those parts can be
improved, rank-order those improvements, and then make as many of those improve-
ments as resources allow – as soon as possible.

Levels 3 and 4: Evaluating Behavior and Results
Level 3 looks at the learners’ behavior when they are back in the real world. Learners don’t
always use what they have learned, and if this is the case, the instruction has failed. Level
3 evaluation could be done after a full operational evaluation (pilot study), if it is impor-
tant enough and resources allow. Such an evaluation requires observing learner behaviors
(related to the instruction) in the real world. When those behaviors do not meet expec-
tations, look for ways the instruction and/or other performance interventions could be
revised to overcome those shortcomings.
    Level 4 looks at organizational or societal results related to the instruction. Even
if learners are behaving as hoped or expected, the impact of those behaviors may not
meet expectations for organizational or societal change. This level of evaluation requires
looking for the kinds of changes hoped for in an organization or society (Kaufman,
                                            Formative Evaluation 185

Table 10.7 Learner Reaction Questionnaire
186 Formative Evaluation

Table 10.8 Data Collection Methods

Data Collection Method         Purpose
Monitor Your Measurement       To check the assessment program for compromise. If an assessment has
  Program                        been compromised, it cannot provide useful feedback.
                               To monitor the assessment program to ensure quality.
Compile Measurement Data       To evaluate instruction in terms of learner performance. Use performance
                                 measures to determine learners’ achievement of objectives.


2000), which may not occur immediately. When the changes fall short, look for ways
the instruction and/or other performance interventions could be revised to overcome
those shortcomings.

Conducting a Formative Process Evaluation
You should continually evaluate your ID process while you are conducting it, so you can
make it more effective and efficient. The major questions are who should do it and how
should it be done.
   Who. Generally, those who are conducting the process should be the ones to evaluate it.
   How. Two methods for conducting a formative process evaluation are reflection-in-
action and reflection-on-action (Schon, 1995).
   Formative process evaluation focuses on enabling instructional developers to improve
their ID process. A preliminary evaluation plan should be created during the ID project
planning phase (see Chapter 2), and it should be updated throughout all phases of the ID
process. A formative process evaluation plan may contain such information as:

•    Description of ID activities to be evaluated in each phase
•    Who will conduct the evaluation
•    Data sources for each activity being evaluated
•    Evaluation procedures
•    Evaluation schedules
•    Evaluation schedule constraints
•    How the results should be documented
•    How problems should be resolved

Everyone conducting an activity in any phase should constantly seek to collect data about
what is working well, what is not working well, and how to improve it. The process evalu-
ation plan should be updated periodically to include new or revised information, such as:
• Changes in the evaluation strategy for the next phase. For example:
    ο Types of activities to be evaluated
    ο Procedures to be used in evaluating the activities
    ο Standards or metrics to be used in the evaluations.
• Revisions to the evaluation schedules, such as:
    ο Number or quantity of activities to be evaluated
    ο When the activities should be evaluated
• Documentation of the results of the evaluations
• Rationale for changes made to the evaluation strategy
• Lessons learned about the evaluation process during evaluation of each phase
                                                                                       Formative Evaluation 187
Where Are We?
This chapter has offered guidance for all three kinds of formative evaluation: developmen-
tal formative product evaluation, operational formative product evaluation, and formative
process evaluation. It described how the formative evaluation process should be con-
ducted throughout the ID process, including expert review, individual tryouts, small-group
tryouts, and operational tryouts, as well as alpha and beta tests. Finally, it reviewed how
Kirkpatrick’s four levels of evaluation can inform your formative evaluation activities.
    The fourth D, Deploy, is addressed in Chapters 11 and 12. It includes implementation
and summative evaluation. The Holistic 4D Model is summarized at the beginning of the
next unit.

Exercises
Here again we offer suggestions for a professor using this book as a textbook in a course,
to help the students understand more deeply the contents of this chapter. We suggest that
you keep the same teams of about three students each to continue to work on their ID
projects throughout the course. However, these exercises can be done individually by any
reader who wants to deepen their understanding and skills.
   Expert reviews were conducted for the exercises in Chapters 5–7, and expert reviews,
individual tryouts, and small-group tryouts (if appropriate) were conducted as parts of the
exercises in Chapter 9. This leaves the following activities if target learners and context are
available.

 1. Have each team conduct an operational tryout (pilot test) for at least two of the les-
    sons they developed in the Chapter 9 Exercises. Each team should prepare an evalu-
    ation report that describes what they did during the evaluation, what strengths and
    weaknesses they found, and what revisions they recommend be made. For what you
    consider to be the best reports, we suggest you get written permission from the stu-
    dents to use them as examples in the next offering of your course.
 2. Have each team offer suggestions for improvement for the reports of one or two
    other teams before you review and provide feedback to the students.
 3. Have a whole-class, synchronous discussion of the strengths and weaknesses of this
    formative evaluation process, including any difficulties or challenges they faced dur-
    ing the process and what changes to the process might have helped. We would love
    to get your suggestions for improvement.

References
Kaufman, R.A. (2000). Mega planning: Practical tools for organizational success. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage
   Publications, Inc.
Kirkpatrick Partners. (2018). The Kirkpatrick model. Retrieved from https://www.kirkpatrickpartners.com/
   Our-Philosophy/The-Kirkpatrick-Model.
Lesniak, B. (2002). Putting it to the test: Quality control for e-learning courses. The Elearning Developers’ Journal.
   Retrieved from https://www.elearningguild.com/pdf/2/073002dev-h.pdf.
Piskurich, G.M. (2015). Rapid instructional design: Learning ID fast and right (3rd ed.). Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley
   & Sons, Inc.
Schön, D.A. (1995). The reflective practitioner: How professionals think in action. Aldershot, England: Arena.
Unit 4
Deploy




This unit has two chapters. The first offers guidance for implementing the instructional
system, which includes ensuring that systems are in place for four major functions: deliv-
ery, management, support, and evaluation. The second, Chapter 12, provides guidance for
conducting summative evaluations, which are often important for determining whether to
continue, replace, or terminate the instructional system.




Our Holistic 4D Model of ID.
11 Implementation




Overview
After the instruction has been formatively evaluated and revised, you are ready to imple-
ment the instruction. Once the instructional system becomes operational, it will require
continuous support, maintenance, and evaluation to ensure that it operates effectively and
cost-efficiently and meets the needs of the target audience and organization.
   The instructional system functions of delivery, management, support, and evaluation
(see Figure 11.1) should be in place and working if the instruction is to operate effectively
and efficiently. System functions provide the structure that supports, operates, and main-
tains the system. We describe these four functions, followed by additional guidance for
instructor-present instruction and instructor-free instruction.

The Four Functions for Implementation
Delivery Function
The instructional system delivery function is the means by which instruction is provided
to the learners. In the design and development phases of instructional design (ID), appro-
priate delivery methods were selected and developed to deliver instruction to the learners.
Prior to implementing the instructional system, you should ensure that the delivery func-
tion is ready to support the operation of the system. You need answers to questions about
the delivery function, such as:

•   Are there adequate numbers of instructors qualified to support the instructional
    requirements? If not, hire and, if necessary, train them.
•   Are there adequate facilities for any face-to-face instruction (numbers, sizes, configu-
    rations)? If not, procure and, if necessary, reconfigure them.
•   Is the necessary equipment available and operational, such as computers, Internet
    connections, simulators, tablets, and projectors? If not, procure and prepare them.
•   Do online learners have access to appropriate technology? If not, take any necessary
    steps to ensure such access.
•   Are there adequate amounts of learning materials to support the instruction? If not,
    take any necessary steps to ensure adequate amounts.

Support Function
Support is the function of maintaining all parts of the system. It should be preplanned but
also done in response to emerging needs, requests, or complaints. The importance of the
192 Implementation




Figure 11.1 Four System Functions.

instructional system support function cannot be overstressed. Without adequate support,
it may be impossible to implement the instructional system, or at best, its implementation
may suffer reduced effectiveness and efficiency.
   Again, in most implementation situations, support structures already exist to carry out
most of these activities. Your responsibility as a designer of the system is to make sure
that such structures exist and are well structured, and if they are not, to then promote the
design or improvement of those structures. Support is required in the form of a wide vari-
ety of basic support activities, including:

•   Supplying equipment, parts, and materials
•   Maintaining equipment and facilities
•   Reproducing instructional materials
•   Constructing new instructional aids and facilities
•   Providing academic and technology support to learners and staff
•   Providing funding

Evaluation Function
Formative evaluation should be conducted continuously throughout the implementation
of the instructional system. See Chapter 10 for guidance. Summative evaluation should be
conducted whenever the “owner” of the instructional system is concerned about whether
or not to continue it or proof of effectiveness is needed to justify its continuation or to
increase support for the system. However, we caution that initial summative evaluation
could lead to the termination of a program that hasn’t had enough time to work out the
inevitable kinks that come with a new instructional system. See Chapter 12 for guidance.

Management Function
Management is the function of directing or controlling instructional operations, such as
assigning individuals to roles and responsibilities associated with the instructional program,
                                                                           Implementation   193
or acquiring, installing, and maintaining equipment and materials, or hiring and managing
staff. Management has the overall responsibility for ensuring that the three other func-
tions and all other components of the system are fully integrated, compatible, and running
smoothly. The management function should be in place and working throughout the life
of the instructional system from the initial planning stage on. Effective management is
crucial for an effective and efficient instructional system.
   In most implementation situations, organizational structures already exist to carry out
most of these activities. Your responsibility as a designer of the system is to make sure that
such organizational structures exist and are well structured, and if they are not, to then
promote the design or improvement of those structures. The basic activities to be carried
out by the management function are:

•   Planning for the other three functions
•   Managing the other three functions
•   Hiring and managing personnel
•   Maintaining learner records, typically in a database system that includes data on
    enrollment (registrations), engagement (interactions), performance (on course require-
    ments), and activities (what learners are doing)
•   Informing instructors and learners about course management issues, including tech-
    nical problems, updates, and other problems or changes
•   Organizing the resources, which involves identifying, arranging, and bringing
    together resources required for the instructional system
•   Scheduling and monitoring the resources, such as classrooms, lab equipment,
    real-world objects and equipment (e.g., electronic equipment in an electronics repair
    course), and real-world or simulated project environments
•   Continuously evaluating the appropriateness, effectiveness, and efficiency of each
    element in the instructional system (see Chapters 10 and 12 for guidance)
•   Reporting status and progress of the revision of instruction or operation of the
    instructional system
•   Developing and implementing marketing plans for the instruction
•   Reviewing if the projected costs of the instructional system are within the budget,
    and if not, then seeking remedies with the stakeholders
•   Ensuring that any conflicts of interest relevant to the instruction are resolved


Additional Guidance
Implementing Instructor-Present Instruction
Before implementing instructor-present instruction, careful planning is required to
recruit qualified instructors and schedule their time. Also, keep in mind that many
people who serve as instructors may be subject-matter experts (SMEs) who have no
or little formal training in teaching and learning. Even many teachers and professors
have little experience with certain instructional approaches and technologies. In many
contexts, therefore, you may need to train the instructors to improve their knowledge
and skills required for successfully delivering the instruction. To effectively implement
learner-centered instruction, for example, you should provide training on how to facili-
tate learner-centered instruction to those instructors who are inexperienced with the
facilitator roles. For online instruction, the instructors may also need training on vari-
ous aspects of online teaching and learning (e.g., how to interact with learners online).
194 Implementation
Further, if the designed instruction involves new technologies, technology training
should be provided.

Implementing Instructor-Free e-Learning
Before implementing instructor-free e-learning, last-minute checks need to be made to
ensure that all feedback from beta testing has been addressed and that the course is ready
to implement (see Chapter 10 for more information on beta tests). Once the instruction
is ready, all target learners should be informed why they should complete the instruction,
how to access it, how to successfully complete it, when to complete it by, whom to contact
if they encounter any problem or need help, and any other critical information needed to
complete the instruction. You should also ensure that all the target learners have the neces-
sary technology and know how to use it in all the ways that are required.

Where Are We?
This chapter has described the first part of the fourth D (Deploy) in our Holistic 4D
Model – implementing the four instructional system functions of delivery, management,
support, and evaluation. It also offered additional guidance for implementing instructor-
present instruction and instructor-free e-learning. The next chapter addresses the second
part of Deploy – summative evaluation.

Exercises
Here again we offer suggestions for a professor using this book as a textbook in a course,
to help the students understand more deeply the contents of this chapter. We suggest that
you keep the same teams of about three students each to continue to work on their ID
projects throughout the course. However, these exercises can be done individually by any
reader who wants to deepen their understanding and skills.

 1. Have each team develop a plan for implementing the instruction they have designed
    and developed – or, preferably, for the entire instructional system of which their
    instruction would be a part. The implementation plan should address all four system
    functions. For what you consider to be the best reports, we suggest you get written
    permission from the students to use them as examples in the next offering of your
    course.
 2. Have each team offer suggestions for improvement for the implementation plans of
    one or two other teams before you review and provide feedback to the students.
 3. Have a whole-class, synchronous discussion of the implementation process, includ-
    ing any difficulties or challenges they may face during the process. We would love to
    get your suggestions for improvement.
12 Summative Evaluation




Overview
Summative evaluation is conducted to verify the effectiveness of instruction. It helps edu-
cators make informed decisions about whether to maintain currently used instructional
systems, abandon them, or seek a new one that has the potential to meet their needs better.
However, we caution that conducting a summative evaluation too soon after its imple-
mentation could lead to the termination of a program that hasn’t had enough time to work
out the inevitable problems that come with a new instructional system. We recommend
waiting until after sufficient operational formative evaluation and revision (see Chapter 10)
before conducting a summative evaluation.
   As mentioned in Chapter 10, summative evaluation has two parts: the first one that
takes place after implementation (called initial summative evaluation) and those that take place
periodically throughout the remaining life of the instructional system (called continuing sum-
mative evaluation or confirmative evaluation). The ultimate goal of continuing summative evalu-
ation is to ensure that the instruction continues to effectively and cost-efficiently develop
learners who meet established educational needs or training requirements. The methods
are the same for both initial and continuing summative evaluation – only the timing differs.
   The CIPP model (Context, Input, Process, Product) is a useful framework for conduct-
ing summative (and formative) evaluations of an instructional system. It was developed
by Daniel Stufflebeam and colleagues in the 1960s (see e.g., Stufflebeam, 2000, 2003). It
entails evaluating the context, input, process, and product when evaluating an instructional
system.

•   The context evaluation concerns what the instructional needs, problems, and oppor-
    tunities are in order to define goals and judge the significance of outcomes – what
    should be done?
•   The input evaluation concerns the quality of the design of the instructional system –
    how should it be done?
•   The process evaluation concerns how well the design has been implemented or exe-
    cuted – is it being done as planned?
•   The product evaluation concerns the intended and unintended outcomes to deter-
    mine the extent to which the instructional system succeeds in meeting the needs – did
    it work?

For more detailed guidance on conducting summative evaluations, we recommend the
Kirkpatrick model.
196 Summative Evaluation




Figure 12.1 An Example of a Reactionnaire Recreated.


Using the Kirkpatrick Model for Summative Evaluation
In Chapter 10 we introduced the Kirkpatrick model and discussed how its four levels are
used for formative evaluation. In this chapter, we offer guidance for using the Kirkpatrick
model for summative evaluation. The four levels of the model (Kirkpatrick Partners, 2018)
are:

•       Level 1: Reaction
•       Level 2: Learning
•       Level 3: Behavior
•       Level 4: Results

Level 1: Evaluating Participant Reaction
Summative evaluation at this level measures how learners react to the instructional pro-
gram by focusing on their opinions and perceptions. Reactionnaires, also called “happy
sheets” or “smile sheets,” and interviews are the most frequently used data collection
methods (see Figure 12.1 for an example). Level 1 evaluation is conducted in most instruc-
tional systems because it is easy and inexpensive to administer compared to other types
of evaluation. However, you need to be skillful in designing the questions in order to get


Table 12.1 The Kirkpatrick Model.
Level         Function
1 Reaction    Measures the degree to which learners find the training favorable, engaging, and relevant to
                their work or life.
2 Learning    Measures the degree to which learners acquire the intended knowledge, skills, attitudes,
                confidence, and commitment based on their participation in the instruction.
3 Behavior    Measures the degree to which graduates apply in their work or lives what they learned during
                the instruction.
4 Results     Measures the degree to which targeted organizational or societal outcomes occur as a result of
                the instruction and related interventions (e.g., support and incentives).
                                                                      Summative Evaluation 197
useful information. Beyond simply asking if graduates are satisfied with an instructional
program, try to ask specific questions about various aspects of the program, including:
•   Learner objectives
•   Instructional resources
•   Content organization
•   Instructor
•   Instructional environment
•   Timeline
•   Ease of navigation (for e-learning)
Participant reaction is conducted during or immediately after the instruction and is most
often used for formative evaluation. However, it can also provide useful summative infor-
mation from learners after sufficient formative evaluation has improved the quality of the
instructional system.

Level 2: Evaluating Learning
This level of evaluation measures learners’ knowledge gains, skill development, and atti-
tude changes. These data are normally gathered through assessments, observations of per-
formance (often with a checklist), and/or artifacts created by graduates. It is critical to
collect sufficient assessment data, since insufficient data may skew the evaluation results,
possibly leading to incorrect decisions being made. Before data analysis, ensure that data
have been collected from each unit or part of the instruction and that an adequate number
of data samples has been collected in order to validate the reliability of the findings. As
with participant reaction, evaluation of learning is conducted during or immediately after
the instruction and is most often used for formative evaluation. However, it can also pro-
vide useful summative information from learners after sufficient formative evaluation has
improved the quality of the instructional system.

Level 3: Evaluating Behaviors
This level of evaluation measures graduates’ real-world behavior changes and the extent to
which the newly acquired knowledge, skills, and/or attitudes are being used at work or in
life (learning transfer). Typically, it is conducted by evaluators from the organization that
provides the instruction. Most of these evaluation data come from the graduates and their
supervisors in the field. We caution that, when the initial summative evaluation takes place
some months or years after the implementation, some graduates likely went through the
instructional system before operational formative evaluation and revision led to improve-
ments. Therefore, the Level 3 evaluation results should be compared with any changes that
have been made since those graduates were in the instructional system, and conclusions
should be qualified accordingly.
    Unfortunately, learning transfer does not always happen. In many cases, what is learned
in the instruction does not get applied in the real world. Often, it is not because the instruc-
tion is ineffective, but because of various organizational, social, or other contextual bar-
riers that prevent graduates from applying what they learned, especially in job situations.
    Some possible problems that may be identified during a Level 3 evaluation are:

•   The criterion test did not measure graduates’ ability to meet real-world performance
    requirements
198 Summative Evaluation
•    Objectives did not reflect real-world performance requirements
     ο Performance requirements were incorrectly identified during task analysis
     ο Performance requirements changed after task analysis
•    Instruction did not address the influence of contextual factors

The Level 3 evaluation data are typically collected through (1) questionnaires, (2) field
visits, and (3) performance evaluations. Detailed guidance on the common data collection
methods is provided below.

Questionnaires
Questionnaires or surveys are effective, cost-efficient evaluation tools. In Level 3 evaluation,
questionnaires are used to:

•    Determine the perceived ability of graduates to perform the specific tasks in the real
     world or apply specific topics on which they received instruction
•    Identify the specific nature of any deficiency
•    Determine how competent performances are actually being done by graduates

Types of questionnaires. Two types of questionnaires can be used to collect Level
3 evaluation data:

•    One is for the graduates. This questionnaire is designed to find out how they believe
     they are performing in the real world after completing the instructional program.
•    In job situations, the other is for the graduate’s immediate supervisor, to find out how
     she or he believes the graduate is performing.

Table 12.2 summarizes the advantages and disadvantages of questionnaires.
   Preparing questionnaires. Well-constructed questionnaires that are properly admin-
istered are extremely important to the Level 3 evaluation process. Table 12.3 identifies the
five basic stages of questionnaire development.
   Guidelines for developing questions. Guidelines for developing effective questions are:

•    Use closed-end questions when you want the respondent to choose answers from a
     small number of possibilities. However, this may not allow for the range of answers

Table 12.2 Advantages and Disadvantages of Questionnaires

Advantages                                    Disadvantages
• They are comparatively inexpensive to       • They may not be the most reliable form of evaluation; data
  administer                                    validity depends on preparation and distribution
• They can be used to collect large samples   • Communication is one-way; respondents may not
  of graduate and supervisor data               understand some of the questions and evaluators may not
• They yield data that can be easily            understand some of the responses
  tabulated and reported                      • They may not ask the most relevant questions
• Respondents typically give their opinions   • They collect only opinions, which may not be as reliable as
  freely                                        other methods of collecting data
                                              • Low completion rates and inappropriate responses could
                                                occur, affecting accuracy
                                                                                   Summative Evaluation 199

Table 12.3 Stages of Questionnaire Development

Stage      Activity
1          Define the purpose of the questionnaire. Focus only on relevant information.
2          Determine specific information to be collected. Specify exactly what is needed in a list of
             objectives.
3          Develop questions that ask for specific information such as:
           • Conditions/equipment required to perform well
           • Exact action to accomplish the performance
           • Standards of performance
           • Results of the performance

4          Consider motivational factors when developing questionnaires. You want the respondents to
             answer fully and conscientiously. Questionnaires should motivate respondents if they:
           • Explain the purpose of the questionnaire
           • Tell the respondents how they can benefit from answering the questionnaire
           • Write clear and concise instructions
           • Make the questionnaire format uncluttered and easy to answer. For example, using boxes for
             check marks should make the questionnaire easier to answer
           • Arrange the questions in logical order
           • Ask specific questions

5          Test the questionnaire on sample respondents. Ask them to:
           • Evaluate the cover letter or email introduction
           • Check instructions and questions for clarity and brevity
           • Explain how they feel about answering the questions
           • Revise the questionnaire, if necessary, before distribution



        desired. Consider adding “Other” so that the respondents can provide information
        that was not included in the provided options.
•       Use open-end questions when you don't know all the possible answers.
•       Word questions at the respondent’s level of understanding. Use vocabulary and con-
        cepts that are easy for the respondent to understand.
•       Limit each question to one aspect of a topic or one relatively stand-alone part of a task.
•       Decide on the logical order of the questions (typically the order of performance for
        a task, or general to detailed for a topic). Thereby, each question provides a frame of
        reference for upcoming questions.
•       Avoid questions that make it easier to answer one way over another.
•       Avoid questions that convey biases or exceptions.
•       Word questions so they will not threaten the respondents.
•       Supplemental “information-seeking” questions may be used. Such questions may ask
        how much time the graduates spend on individual tasks or what equipment or materi-
        als they use.
Guidelines for constructing questionnaires. When constructing a questionnaire, sev-
eral guidelines should be considered.
•       Provide short, concise, and specific directions for completing the questionnaire
•       Include demographic questions (e.g., name, title, organization, age, gender)
200 Summative Evaluation
•    Provide clear verbal descriptions when using rating scales (e.g., 1 – Strongly Disagree,
     2 – Disagree, 3 – Neutral, 4 – Agree, 5 – Strongly Agree)
•    Make sure that all responses are mutually exclusive and there is no overlap (as in
     Figure 12.2)
•    Make the questionnaire easy to read and understand
•    For paper-based questionnaires:
     ο Number the questionnaires to allow for administrative control
     ο Number each page of the questionnaire
     ο You may want to print on both sides of the pages to conserve materials
     ο Send self-addressed, stamped return envelope with the questionnaire
     ο Fold the questionnaire in such a manner that the respondent can refold it the
         same way to place it in the return envelope after completion
     ο You may want to include an incentive of some kind with each questionnaire to get
         a higher response rate

Guidelines for preparing an introduction. Each questionnaire should have a cover let-
ter (for paper format) or introduction (for online format). When developing the cover
letter/introduction, ensure that it:

•    Explains the purpose of the questionnaire and its importance for improving instruction
•    Includes a statement that assures the respondent that the information will be treated
     confidentially
•    Provides information on how to return or submit the questionnaire
•    Indicates the approximate time required to complete the questionnaire
•    Shows the recommended return date
•    If paper-based questionnaire, uses appropriate letterhead stationery signed by a
     responsible authority

Before you distribute the questionnaire, it should be administered to a small number of
representative individuals for pilot testing, to:

•    Provide valuable feedback on the quality of the questionnaire
•    Allow correction of problems in the questionnaire before distribution



    2. Age

        20–29

        30–39

        40–49

        50–59

        60–69

        70 or older


Figure 12.2 A Survey Question with Mutually Exclusive Responses.
                                                                     Summative Evaluation 201
•    Preclude acquiring misinformation resulting from administration of a faulty
     questionnaire

Distribution of questionnaires is a critical aspect of evaluation; don't just pick a few
graduates’ names and send a questionnaire to them. Plan the distribution to ensure that
the data collected are valid and reliable. When distributing the questionnaire, you should:

•    Decide to whom you are sending the questionnaire: a graduate, his or her supervisor,
     or both. You may collect important information from both.
•    Select a representative sample to ensure valid results. Graduates may have different
     life needs, job requirements depending on such factors as their major responsibilities,
     geographic location, or organization level, requiring differences in their performances.
     Therefore, your sample should be selected as representatively as possible.
•    For paper versions, determine how many questionnaires you need to send out. That
     decision is based on:
     ο Expected response rate.
     ο Level of confidence (a statistical consideration which means the size of the sample
          required for you to be, say, 95 percent sure the sample truly represents the larger
          population). The graduate sampling chart in Table 12.4 shows how to determine
          the number of questionnaires you need based on this consideration.

Decide when to distribute the questionnaires. Timing is critical. Usually, question-
naires should be sent to the graduates within three to six months after completion of the
instruction. Beyond six months, it may be impossible to tell whether the graduate learned
the skill or knowledge in the instruction, or after it. If the questionnaire is sent too early,
the graduate may not have had time to perform many of the tasks that were taught. To
ensure that sufficient numbers of the questionnaires are completed for analysis, contact
non-respondents and encourage their response.

Field Visits (Interviews and Observations)
Field visits are a very effective method of conducting evaluations but are more expensive.
They are normally conducted by an evaluator, often assisted by an instructional designer
or instructor. The purposes of a field visit are to get first-hand information on graduates’
real-world performance (how well they are applying what was learned), and to validate
information gained from other evaluation activities. Interviews and observations are pri-
mary data-collection methods for field visits. Evaluators should interview graduates and
those with whom the graduates interact (e.g., their supervisors) and observe the graduates’
on-the-job performance when possible. However, observations are almost useless unless
the observer is familiar with the tasks being performed. Ideally, field visits should include
experts in the graduates’ performances. However, in most cases this is not possible due
to limited funds, scheduling constraints, and number and variety of graduates to be inter-
viewed. Table 12.5 summarizes the advantages and disadvantages of field visits. Checklists
are often used during observation.
   Preparing for the field visit. Visits to the field to collect evaluation data require ade-
quate planning to ensure that useful data are gathered. To prepare for the visit, you should:

•    Develop a list of questions (interview protocol) to get honest, pertinent answers and
     to keep the discussion focused
202 Summative Evaluation

           Table 12.4 Graduate Sampling Chart

           Graduate Sampling Chart
           Course Graduates (during    Sample Size for 95% Sample Size for 90% Sample Size for
           sampling period)            Confidence*         Confidence          80% Confidence
           10                           10                     10                     9
           20                           19                     19                    18
           40                           36                     35                    32
           60                           52                     49                    44
           80                           67                     62                    54
           100                          80                     73                    62
           120                          92                     83                    69
           160                         114                    101                    81
           200                         133                    115                    90
           250                         154                    130                    99
           300                         171                    142                   106
           350                         187                    153                   112
           400                         200                    161                   116
           450                         212                    169                   120
           500                         222                    176                   123
           600                         240                    186                   129
           700                         255                    195                   133
           800                         267                    202                   136
           900                         277                    208                   139
           1,000                       286                    213                   141
           1,500                       316                    229                   148
           2,000                       333                    238                   151
           2,500                       345                    244                   154
           3,000                       353                    248                   155
           3,500                       358                    251                   157
           4,000                       364                    253                   157
           4,500                       367                    255                   158
           5,000                       370                    257                   159
           10,000                      383                    263                   161
           25,000                      394                    268                   163
           100,000                     398                    270                   164
           How to use this table. The table can be used as shown in the following example:
           Annual course production is 4,000, and a 95% confidence level is desired. * From the table,
           364 usable questionnaires are required. The estimated return rate of usable questionnaires
           is 85% (0.85). Therefore, the number of questionnaires to mail (M) is computed as follows:
           0.85M = 364 M = 364/0.85 M = 428
           * It is recommended that the 95% confidence level be chosen. This is the level commonly
           used in business and education decisions.


•   Determine the places to be visited
•   Establish the schedule for the visit
•   Select the individuals to be interviewed and observed

   Conducting the field visit. The following are some of the tasks to be performed dur-
ing the field visit.

•   Inform graduates and supervisors of the purpose of the visit. Tell them that their
    answers will furnish valuable information for improving the instruction.
•   Interview the graduates and their supervisors.
                                                                                    Summative Evaluation 203

Table 12.5 Advantages and Disadvantages of Field Visits

Advantages                                   Disadvantages
• Information is gathered first-hand         • They are time-consuming. Travel to several different locations
  by the evaluator from graduates and          requires considerable time. Interviews and observations also
  their supervisors. Any questions or          require a lot of time if they are done correctly.
  assumptions can be clarified.              • The sample is limited. Since the evaluator typically only goes
• Field visits help validate and elaborate     to a few locations, the number of interviews and observations
  on questionnaire data.                       conducted is limited.
• Field visits build rapport between         • The cost is high. Field visits require evaluators to spend limited
  the instructional personnel and the          funds to travel to the various locations.
  graduates.                                 • Information gathered by the evaluator can be subjective and
• Additional information can be gained         biased.
  by observing nonverbal messages and        • Graduates may feel they are being scrutinized.
  asking leading or probing questions.       • Evaluators are not always skilled at interviewing and observing.


•    Determine the graduates’ proficiency.
•    Determine how the knowledge and skills learned during instruction are being used.
•    Guide the interviews with your list of questions. (As the interview progresses, you may
     need to add, delete, or revise questions.)
•    Have the supervisor (or others impacted by the graduate’s performance) rate the per-
     formance confidentially.
•    Observe graduates performing the tasks. (This may not be beneficial if the evaluator
     does not have expertise in the performance or the task is not observable.) Take careful
     notes on the graduate’s performance. After the task has been completed, ask ques-
     tions to clarify actions taken by the graduates during the performance.
•    Take accurate and complete notes during interviews and observations.

  Analyzing the data. Data collected from interviews and observations is analyzed in the
same manner as questionnaires: that is, compiled, collated, and analyzed by the evaluator.
  Validating the findings. The analysis results of the field visits and questionnaires
should be combined and compared in order to validate the findings.

Performance Evaluations
The purpose of performance evaluations is to determine how well graduates perform what
they were supposed to learn. In work settings, performance evaluations are conducted on-
the-job by the supervisor. Data are collected periodically through observations and quality
of results and are reported by the supervisor to an evaluator for analysis. For education con-
texts, they are typically conducted at-a-distance by the educators or an evaluator through
questionnaires (see the Questionnaires section) or interviews (see the Field Visits section).
Table 12.6 summarizes the advantages and disadvantages of performance evaluations.
   Preparing for the evaluation. As with any evaluation method, you should make ade-
quate plans before starting. Planning includes:

•    Selecting graduates and those impacted by their performance (e.g., their supervisors or
     customers) to participate in the performance evaluation
•    Meeting with, or otherwise contacting, the graduates to explain performance evaluations
204 Summative Evaluation

Table 12.6 Advantages and Disadvantages of Performance Evaluations

Advantages                                                      Disadvantages
• In work contexts, evaluations are conducted on the job by     • If performance evaluations are not
  the supervisor, reducing the cost to the evaluator              conducted in a work context, it will
• Such evaluations are typically thorough and accurate            take a lot of the supervisor’s time and
  assessments of the graduates’ performance                       effort to conduct the evaluation
• Data can be used to validate other forms of field evaluations • The sample is limited


•    Getting the commitment of those impacted to support the evaluation (especially the
     supervisor in work contexts)
•    Determining performances to be evaluated based on the goals of the instruction
•    Determining the criteria for the performances to be evaluated
•    Establishing milestones for the evaluation process

   Conducting performance evaluations. Once the participants have been selected and
briefed on the process and its importance, it is time to begin the evaluation. For work
contexts, the evaluation consists of the following activities:

•    The supervisor evaluates the graduates’ performance on each task performed
•    The supervisor reports on the quality of the performances. Sometimes it is helpful to
     include:
     ο The frequency of performance
     ο The time required to perform
     ο Equipment used
     ο The standard of performance exhibited
     ο Any special circumstances for the performance

For non-work contexts, the performance evaluation consists of the following:

•    The evaluator asks the graduates for names of those affected by their performance
     and either interviews or gives questionnaires to those people. Alternatively, the evalu-
     ator could ask the graduates to gather feedback from those affected by their perfor-
     mance and forward that information to the evaluator. Anonymous questionnaires are
     important for accurate information.
•    While not an evaluation of performance, the evaluator should also ask the graduates to
     comment on the quality of preparation provided by the instruction (strengths, weak-
     nesses, and suggestions for improvement) because it is useful for deciding whether to
     continue, discontinue, or replace a program.

   Data analysis and reporting. When the evaluator receives the performance reports
from the supervisor or graduate, they are analyzed to determine how well the graduates are
performing the tasks they were taught during the instruction, as an indicator of whether
the instructional program should be continued, discontinued, or replaced. Evaluators
should watch for reports that indicate the graduate:

•    Cannot perform a task that he or she learned in the instruction
•    Requires excessive help to perform the task
                                                                   Summative Evaluation 205
•   Any special circumstances that may have impacted the quality of performance (cir-
    cumstances that the instruction may not have adequately addressed)

In these situations, data analysis should focus on determining why the graduate is not able
to meet job performance requirements, to accurately decide whether the instructional pro-
gram should be continued, discontinued, or replaced.

Level 4: Evaluating Results
This level of evaluation measures the organizational or societal impact of the instructional
program – that is, the impact of the instruction on the organization’s performance. For
work contexts, some of the organizational performance indicators include:

•   Increased sales
•   Decreased costs
•   Improved quality of products and service
•   More efficient processes
•   Improved customer satisfaction
•   Improved employee satisfaction
•   Reduced frequency of accidents

For education contexts, some of the organizational or societal performance indicators
include:

•   Improvement in meeting the organization’s goals (e.g., for a family as the organization,
    improved relationships among the family members or improved financial situation)
•   Improvement in the functioning of society (e.g., more informed voter participation,
    lower crime rate, lower teen pregnancy rate, or higher literacy rate)

The Level 4 evaluation is rarely done because gathering the organizational or societal
data is difficult and typically requires support from management or government and
involvement by finance and budgeting people. However, the results of Level 4 can
communicate the success of the instructional program in terms that leaders understand
and can provide the most important indicator as to whether the program should con-
tinue or be either discontinued or replaced with a better one. Nevertheless, we caution
that, when the initial summative evaluation takes place months or years after the imple-
mentation, some graduates likely went through the instructional system before oper-
ational formative evaluation and revision led to improvements. Therefore, the Level
4 evaluation results should be compared with any changes that have been made since
those graduates were in the instructional system, and conclusions should be qualified
accordingly.

Where Are We?
This chapter has offered guidance for summative evaluation. It reviewed Kirkpatrick’s
four levels of evaluation and described how summative evaluation could be conducted
at the four levels. Along with Implementation (Chapter 11), Summative Evaluation com-
pletes the last D (Deploy) in the Holistic 4D Model. In our epilogue, we offer some con-
cluding remarks.
206 Summative Evaluation
Exercises
Here again we offer suggestions for a professor using this book as a textbook in a course,
to help the students understand more deeply the contents of this chapter. We suggest that
you keep the same teams of about three students each to continue to work on their ID
projects throughout the course. However, these exercises can be done individually by any
reader who wants to deepen their understanding and skills.
   Given that only a small amount of instruction has been developed during your course,
full implementation and summative evaluation are seldom possible. However, you could
identify a small instructional system that is currently operating, such as a two-hour work-
shop, and have your students conduct a summative evaluation of it, as follows:

 1. Have each team conduct a summative evaluation of the selected instruction. Each
    team should prepare an evaluation report that describes what they did during the
    evaluation, what strengths and weaknesses they found, and what conclusions they
    draw regarding whether to continue, terminate, or replace the instruction. For what
    you consider to be the best reports, we suggest you get written permission from the
    students to use them as examples in the next offering of your course.
       Alternatively, you could just have each team prepare a summative evaluation plan
    for the larger instructional system of which the team’s previous exercises addressed
    one small part.
 2. Have each team offer suggestions for improvement for the reports (or plans) of one
    or two other teams before you review and provide feedback to the students.
 3. Have a whole-class, synchronous discussion of the strengths and weaknesses of this
    summative evaluation process, including any difficulties or challenges they faced dur-
    ing the process and what changes to the process might have helped. We would love
    to get your suggestions for improvement.

References
Kirkpatrick Partners. (2018). The Kirkpatrick model. Retrieved from https://www.kirkpatrickpartners.com/
   Our-Philosophy/The-Kirkpatrick-Model.
Stufflebeam, D.L. (2000). The CIPP model for evaluation. In D. L. Stufflebeam, G. F. Madaus & T. Kellaghan
   (Eds.), Evaluation models (2nd ed.). Boston, MA: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Stufflebeam, D.L. (2003). The CIPP model for evaluation. In T. Kellaghan & D.L. Stufflebeam (Eds.),
   International handbook of educational evaluation. Kluwer international handbooks of education (Vol. 9). Dordrecht:
   Springer.
Afterword




Over the past few decades, dramatic advances have been made in learning theory, instruc-
tional theory, and technological tools for both instruction and instructional design (ID).
The Holistic 4D Model has been developed to incorporate these advances into the ID
process. But additional significant advances will surely continue over the next few decades,
and the Holistic 4D Model needs to continue to evolve. We do not view this model as pro-
prietary – as ours. We encourage contributions to its evolution from other ID experts. Our
vision is that the next edition of this book will have sections authored by other experts.
We recognize that many instructional design decisions are situational – that the designs
(instructional methods) need to change from one situation to another. This model does not
yet include all kinds of instruction for all kinds of situations. So, if you see ways this model
can be improved, please write up your ideas and contact one of us to discuss them. Our
field will advance more if we collaborate and build on each other’s ideas and experiences.
    Second, for those of you who teach ID, we encourage you to share your ideas and
resources for using this book in your courses. We have created a website to facilitate such
sharing: www.reigeluth.net/holistic-4d. Send us your ideas and resources – syllabi, student
projects, course schedules, examples, suggestions, and so forth – and we will post them
with full credit to you (and your students, if appropriate). We will also likely start a blog as
a vehicle for you to communicate directly with each other. If you have any suggestions at
all, we would love to hear from you. You can contact us at reigeluth@indiana.edu or yunjo
.an@unt.edu.
        Appendix


        This appendix contains all the templates or forms offered in this book, as a convenience
        for you to photocopy. You can also find electronic versions of these forms at www.reige-
        luth.net/holistic-4d.

        Template for a Top-Level Analysis, Design, and Evaluation (ADE) Document for Task Expertise




Copyright material from Charles M. Reigeluth and Yunjo An (2021), Merging the Instructional Design Process with Learner-Centered Theory: The Holistic
4D Model, Routledge
          210 Appendix

          Template for a Top-Level ADE Document for Topic Expertise




Copyright material from Charles M. Reigeluth and Yunjo An (2021), Merging the Instructional Design Process with Learner-Centered Theory: The Holistic
4D Model, Routledge
                                                                                                                     Appendix 211

        Template for a Mid-Level ADE Document for Task Expertise (Use One Form for Each Version of the Task)




Copyright material from Charles M. Reigeluth and Yunjo An (2021), Merging the Instructional Design Process with Learner-Centered Theory: The Holistic
4D Model, Routledge
          212      Appendix

          Template for a Mid-Level ADE Document for Topic Expertise (Use One Form for Each Application of the
          Topic)




Copyright material from Charles M. Reigeluth and Yunjo An (2021), Merging the Instructional Design Process with Learner-Centered Theory: The Holistic
4D Model, Routledge
                                                                                                                     Appendix 213

        Template for a Lower-Level ADE Document for Task Expertise (Use for Each Version of Each Topic)




Copyright material from Charles M. Reigeluth and Yunjo An (2021), Merging the Instructional Design Process with Learner-Centered Theory: The Holistic
4D Model, Routledge
          214 Appendix

          Template for a Lower-Level ADE Document for Topic Expertise (Use for Each Topic)




Copyright material from Charles M. Reigeluth and Yunjo An (2021), Merging the Instructional Design Process with Learner-Centered Theory: The Holistic
4D Model, Routledge
                                                                                                                     Appendix 215

        Additional Template for the Supporting Content in a Lower-Level ADE Document (Use for Each Version or
        Topic)




Copyright material from Charles M. Reigeluth and Yunjo An (2021), Merging the Instructional Design Process with Learner-Centered Theory: The Holistic
4D Model, Routledge
          216 Appendix

          Form for Review of Existing Materials




Copyright material from Charles M. Reigeluth and Yunjo An (2021), Merging the Instructional Design Process with Learner-Centered Theory: The Holistic
4D Model, Routledge
                                                                                                                     Appendix 217

        Learner Reaction Questionnaire




Copyright material from Charles M. Reigeluth and Yunjo An (2021), Merging the Instructional Design Process with Learner-Centered Theory: The Holistic
4D Model, Routledge
Index




Note: Page numbers in italics indicate figures and page numbers in bold indicate tables.

abstract objectives 99–100, 100, 101, 101                    learner-centered instruction and 102, 104; lower-
acquisition 147                                              level ADE process and 137–138; mid-level ADE
acting on attitudes and values 156–157, 157                  process and 101–103; norm-referenced 101;
active learning 59                                           performance 102; predictive 102; teacher-centered
ADDIE model 9, 9                                             instruction and 102, 104; whole tasks and versions
ADE see analysis-design-evaluation (ADE)                     101; whole topics and applications 101
ADE documents: analysis and evaluation in 59,             Association for Talent Development (ATD) 7
   83–84; formative evaluation 138–139; learner           Association for Training and Development 56
   reaction questionnaire 185, 217; lower-level ADE       Attention, Relevance, Confidence, and Satisfaction
   process and 138–139; lower-level supporting               (ARCS) model 64, 64, 137
   content 129, 215; lower-level task expertise           attitudes 43
   template 123, 213; lower-level topic expertise         Ausubel, D.P. 41
   template 213, 214; mid-level task expertise template   Ausubel’s taxonomy 41, 42
   111, 211; mid-level topic expertise template 112,
   212; preparation of top-level 76, 84; review of        behavioral theories 43–44
   existing materials 216; sequence design for subjects   beta tests 183
   and topics 79; top-level task expertise template 77,   blended learning 82
   209; top-level topic expertise template 80, 210        Bloom, B.S. 41, 43, 156
affective domain 41, 43, 156                              Bloom’s taxonomy 41, 42, 43
affordances 108                                           branching procedures 117, 118, 119, 121
agile software development 58                             branching sequence 75
alpha tests 139, 183                                      Brand, S. 12
analysis-design-evaluation (ADE): design                  Briggs, L. 4
   documents and 59; formative evaluation and 178;        Brush, T. 135
   instructional design (ID) models xii; just-in-time
   (JIT) analysis and xii; lower-level analysis 32, 67;   case-based instruction (CBI) 62
   mid-level analysis 32, 67; task vs. topic expertise    causal relationships: acquisition and 147;
   67, 73; top-level analysis 32, 67, 72–73, 73; top-        application and 147–148; control strategies for
   level task expertise process 85; top-level topic          150, 151; defining 42; example of 148; kinds of
   expertise process 85; see also ADE documents;             performance 148–150; performance strategies
   lower-level ADE process; mid-level ADE                    and 149–150, 150; primary strategies for 147, 149;
   process; top-level ADE process                            secondary strategies for 148, 149
Anderson, J.R. 41                                         Chapman, B. 56
Anderson’s taxonomy 41, 42                                Chou, Y.-K. 63, 65
application 147                                           chunking tasks 76
ARCS see Attention, Relevance, Confidence, and            chunking topics 79
   Satisfaction (ARCS) model                              CIPP (context-input-process-product) 31, 84, 195
Aristotle 5                                               Clark, R.C. 169
assessments: characteristics of 102–103, 103;             Clark, R.E. 26
   criterion-referenced 101–102; development of           classical conditioning theory 44
   103, 104; dimensions of divergence 138, 138;           coaching strategies 136
220 Index
cognitive constructivism 45                                  theories 43–45, 49; lower-level analysis 15; mid-
cognitive theories 43–45                                     level analysis 15; top-level analysis 15; see also
Comenius, John Amos 5, 6                                     analysis-design-evaluation (ADE)
competency-based learning 60                               developmental evaluation 174, 175
complex learning 48, 49                                    development platforms 164
concept-classification skills 42                           Development process: developing instructor
conceptual relationships: control strategies for 153,        guides 171; developing learner guides 169–171;
   154; dimensions of understanding 152; primary             development platforms and 164; development tools
   strategies for 152–153; secondary strategies for          166–167; exercises for 172–173; factors for xiv;
   153, 153                                                  formative evaluation 171–172; guidance for 161;
conceptual-theoretical relationships: causal                 instructor present or not 164; learning management
   relationships and 147–150; conceptual                     systems (LMS) and 164; producing and 143, 163;
   relationships 152–153, 153, 154; instructional            producing instructional media 165–169, 172;
   strategies and 143, 146–152, 152, 153; natural-           project management plan and 172; scripting and
   process relationships 150–152                             143, 163; type of instruction and 163–165, 172
conceptual understanding: defining 42; examples in         development tools 166
   biology 93; instructional strategies and 146; mid-      Dick and Carey Systems Approach Model 9–10, 10
   level topic classification 92; organizing content       Didactica Magna (Comenius) 5
   and 122, 123, 124, 127; schemas and 42
confirmation evaluation 174                                echoing 58
constructionism 45, 62                                     education: competency-based 64; defining 3;
constructivist theories 43, 45                                game-based training in 63; inquiry-based
content see organizing content; supporting content            learning (IBL) and 61; learning by doing 60–61;
content analysis 54                                           mastery approach to 81; problem-based learning
content reviews 177                                           (PBL) and 60; remember-level learning in 144;
content script 167                                            standardization and conformity in 59; topic
content validity 102                                          expertise and 52–53; training vs. 52; universal 5
context analysis 54–55                                     educational technologies 56, 169; see also
continuing summative evaluation 174, 195                      instructional media
copyright law 133                                          Elaboration Theory 47, 49
corporate training 55, 59, 61                              eLearning Guild 8, 56
course management systems 83; see also learning            e-Learning instruction: alpha tests and 183; beta
   management systems (LMS)                                   tests and 183; development platforms and 164;
course syllabus 169                                           development tools and 166–167; implementation
Creative Commons 134                                          of 194; instructor-free 164, 194; interactive
criterion-referenced assessments 101–102                      72–73; scenario-based 62–63; self-paced 63; time
                                                              requirement for 56
Deci, E.L. 64                                              electronic performance support systems (EPSS) 26
Define process: analysis in 21; ID project planning        elementary school math teachers: job, duties, and
  28–35; pre-instructional design 21, 23–25, 27; see          tasks for 75; sequence design for duties and tasks
  also ID project planning                                    75; two perspectives on job duties 74
delivery function 191                                      EPSS see electronic performance support systems
demonstration objectives xii–xiii, 99–100, 100                (EPSS)
Deploy process: exercises for 194; guidance for            ergonomics 26
  189; implementation and 191–194; instructional           evaluation: CIPP method and 195; confirmation
  system delivery and xiv; summative evaluation               174; developmental 174, 175; implementation and
  and 195–206; see also implementation; summative             192; operational 174, 175, 181–183; process xiii,
  evaluation                                                  32–33, 174, 186; product xiii, 174, 176–177; types
description continuum 73–74, 76                               of 175; see also formative evaluation; summative
design documents 59, 84; see also ADE documents               evaluation
design document templates xi, xii                          experiential learning 60
designer objectives: for different levels 97; guidelines   expert review 84, 99, 110, 132
  for 97, 98; Holistic 4D Model and xii, xiii; mid-        experts 108
  level ADE process and 88, 93–94, 95, 96, 97              explanatory models 119, 121
design layering 12                                         extrinsically motivated behavior 63–64
Design process: development of xiv; instructional
  theory 46–49; learning and instruction theories          Fair use guidelines 133–134
  39–40; learning categories 41–43, 48–49; learning        fidelity 109
                                                                                                      Index    221
field visits: advantages/disadvantages of 203;               instruction and xii; levels in 14–16; lower-
   analyzing data 203; conducting 202–203;                   level analysis 14; mid-level analysis 14; non-
   preparing for 201–202; summative evaluation and           instructional interventions and xii; product and
   201–203, 203; validating findings 203                     process evaluations xiii; rapid prototyping and
Flanagan, J. 4                                               xii; systems diagram 15, 15, 21, 39; topic and
flipped classroom 63                                         task expertise in xii; top-level analysis 14; see also
formative evaluation: ADE process for task expertise         Define process; Deploy process; Design process;
   178; ADE process for topic expertise 178; alpha           Development process
   tests 139, 183; beta tests 183; CIPP method and         hybrid learning 82
   195; content reviews and 177; data collection
   methods 186; developing a plan for 174–176;             IACET see International Association for Continuing
   developmental product evaluation 187; e-learning           Education and Training (IACET)
   and 183; exercises for 187; expert review 176–177;      ibstpi see International Board of Standards for
   ID process and xiii; implementation and 192;               Training, Performance, and Instruction (ibstpi)
   individual tryouts and 139, 177–179, 179, 180, 180;     ID process see instructional design (ID) process
   Kirkpatrick Model for 183–184, 185, 186; lower-         ID project planning see instructional design (ID)
   level ADE process and 132, 138–139; media use              project planning
   during tryouts 179; methods review and 177; mid-        implementation: delivery function 191; evaluation
   level ADE process and 99, 110; operational product         function 192; guidance for 193; instructor-free
   evaluation 181–183, 187; process evaluation                e-Learning and 194; instructor-present instruction
   186–187; process evaluation plan 175–176; product          and 193–194; management function 192–193;
   evaluation 176, 176, 177; product evaluation plan          support function 191–192; system functions
   175; purpose of 174; rapid prototyping (RP) and            191–192, 192, 193; see also Deploy process
   59; revision and 83–84, 99, 110, 171, 177, 186; small   information 53–54
   group tryouts and 139, 180–181; sources of data for     information processing theory 44, 126
   tryouts 180; stages of data collection 182, 182;        initial summative evaluation 174, 195
   top-level ADE process and 84; types of 161              inquiry-based learning (IBL) 61
4C/ID Model 48                                             instruction: approaches for 59–63; customization
                                                              and 59; defining 3; delivery methods and 82–83;
Gagné, R. 4, 41, 47, 90, 130                                  environmental factors and 55; flipped classroom
Gagné‘s Nine Events of Instruction 47, 49                     and 63; game-based training and 63; gamification
Gagné‘s taxonomy 41, 42                                       and 63; instructor-present 193–194; mastery-
game-based training 63                                        based 80–81; online vs. face-to-face 163; scenario-
gamification 63, 65                                           based eLearning and 62–63; self-paced eLearning
Gibbons, A.S. 12                                              and 63; teacher-centered 60; see also e-Learning
Gilbert, M. 24                                                instruction; learner-centered instruction; teacher-
Gilbert, T. 24                                                centered instruction
Gordon, J. 13                                              instructional context 55
graphic design 168, 169                                    instructional design (ID): advanced media and
group-based learning 139, 180–181                             164; American contributions to 4–5; behavioral
                                                              approach to 4–5; defining 1; developing instructor
Hannafin, M.J. 134                                            guides 171; developing learner guides 169–171;
hard technology 3                                             European contributions to 5–6; examples of 3;
Heinich, R. 54                                                heuristic problem-solving and 2; learner-centered
heuristics: examples of 2; examples of tasks 117;             instruction and 164–165; learning and instruction
   explanatory models 119, 121; organizing content            theories 41–42; learning management systems
   and 115–116; problem-solving and 2                         (LMS) and 164; media development and 165–167,
heuristic task analysis procedure 119, 120, 121, 123          167, 168–169, 172; project management plan
hierarchical sequencing 47                                    and 30–33, 36, 172; quality issues in 2–3; type of
higher-order learning 43                                      instruction and 163–164
Holistic 4D Model: analysis-design-evaluation              instructional design (ID) models: ADDIE model
   (ADE) cycles xi, xii; demonstration objectives             9, 9; design layering and 12; development of xi;
   and xii–xiii; designer objectives and xii–xiii;            Dick and Carey Systems Approach Model 9–10,
   exercises for 18; holistic design process in xi,           10; formative evaluation of xiii; Morrison, Ross,
   13–14; innovations in 16–17; instructional design          and Kemp Model 10–11, 11; pebble-in-the-pond
   (ID) process and 207; instructional sequences              model 13, 13; rapid prototyping and 11–12, 12;
   in xii; instructional theory integration and xii;          summative evaluation and xiii; see also Holistic 4D
   just-in-time (JIT) analysis and xii; learner-centered      Model
222 Index
instructional design (ID) process: activities in        instructional systems development (ISD) 1
   preparation for xiii; budget for 72; content         instructional theory: 4C/ID Model 48–49; defining
   analysis and 54; context analysis and 54–55;            46; Elaboration Theory and 47, 49; Gagné‘s
   defining the project 21, 23; design documents           Nine Events of Instruction 47, 49; hierarchical
   and 59; exercises for 68; holistic design process       sequencing and 47; Holistic 4D Model and xii;
   in 89–90; instructional approaches and 59–63;           instructional methods and 46; instructional
   instructional context and 55; just-in-time (JIT)        situations and 46–47; learner differences and 47;
   analysis and 56–57; learner analysis and 54; media      Merrill’s First Principles of Instruction 48, 48, 49;
   selection and 65–66; motivational strategies            ten steps to complex learning 48, 49
   and 63–65; rapid prototyping (RP) and 58–59;         instructor-centered instruction (ICI) 163, 171; see also
   resource analysis and 55–56; subject-matter             teacher-centered instruction
   experts (SMEs) and 57, 57, 58; task vs. topic        instructor control 146
   expertise 52–53, 53, 67; time investment for 56,     instructor-free e-Learning 164, 194
   56; transfer context and 55; what to analyze in      instructor guides 171
   53–56                                                instructor-present instruction 164, 193–194
instructional design (ID) project planning: CIPP        interactive e-learning 72–73
   method and 31; defining 28; exercises for            interactive media 107–108
   36; guidance for 30; initiating phase 30–31;         interactive multimedia instructional systems 56
   instructional-system functions 34–35, 34; key        interactive skills 43
   activities in 29; planning activities for system     International Association for Continuing Education
   functions 35; planning phase 31–32; process             and Training (IACET) 7
   evaluation and 32–33; project management and         International Board of Standards for Training,
   30–32, 32, 33, 36; project management plan              Performance, and Instruction (ibstpi) 6
   template 33; SWOT analysis and 31                    International Commission on Mathematical
instructional design (ID) projects: ATD/IACET/             Instruction (ICMI) 6
   R&A competencies and 7–8; eLearning Guild            International Mathematical Union 6
   study and 8; estimating resource requirements for    intrinsically motivated behavior 63–64
   132–133; exercises for 49; ibstpi competencies
   and 6–7, 7; instructional goals for 28               James, W. 5
instructional designers 8–9                             Jonassen, D.H. 62
instructional formats 134, 135                          just-in-time (JIT) analysis xii, 56–57
instructional interventions 25                          just-in-time content 130
instructional media: activities to do 166, 167;         just-in-time tutorials 143
   avoiding layout mistakes 168, 168; content script
   167; development roles and 167; development          Keller, J.M. 64, 137
   tools 166–167; factors for 166; graphic design and   Khan Academy 143
   168–169, 169; guidelines for technology-enhanced     Kirkpatrick, D. 183
   instruction 169; job aid for finalizing 172;         Kirkpatrick Model: data collection methods 186;
   principles of multimedia learning 170; production      evaluating behavior 184, 197–198; evaluating
   of 165–166; scripts for 168; scriptwriting and         learning 184, 197; evaluating participant reaction
   167–168; storyboards and 168; types of 165             184, 196–197; evaluating results 184, 186;
instructional methods 46, 79–83                           formative evaluation and 183–184; Learner
instructional needs assessment 25, 27–28, 29              Reaction Questionnaire 185; levels in 183, 196;
instructional sequences xii                               summative evaluation and 195–198
instructional situations 46                             Kirschner, P.A. 48
instructional strategies: acting on attitudes and       Krathwohl, D.R. 43, 156
   values 143, 156–157; ADE process for task
   expertise 158; ADE process for topic expertise       learner analysis 54
   158; applying skills and 143, 153–155, 156;          learner assessments see assessments
   coaching strategies 136, 136, 137; exercises for     learner-centered instruction: approaches for 60–63;
   158–159; instructional formats and 134, 135;            case-based instruction (CBI) and 62; competency-
   just-in-time tutorials and 143; producing and 143;      based learning 60; criterion-referenced
   remembering information 143–146, 146, 147;              assessments and 102; developing instruction for
   scaffolding design 134–136; scripting and 143;          164–165; developing instructor guides 171; digital
   timing for 145; types of learning and 137, 143;         age and 59; Holistic 4D Model and xii; inquiry-
   understanding relationships 143, 146–149, 149,          based learning (IBL) and 61; learning plans and
   150, 150, 151–152, 152, 153                             169; maker-based learning and 62; maximizing
instructional-system functions 34–35, 34, 35               learning 59; performance assessments and
                                                                                                     Index    223
   102; problem-based learning (PBL) and 60–61;               combination tasks 119; analyzing heuristic
   project-based learning and 61; scaffolding and             tasks 119, 120, 121; analyzing linear procedural
   134–136; task-centered instruction (TCI) and               tasks 117; analyzing versions of tasks 116–117;
   61–62; timing for instruction 145; top-level ADE           procedural tasks and 116–117; select and
   process and 81; type of instruction and 163                sequence organizing content 115–116
learner control 127, 146                                    lower-level topic expertise: ADE process and 116,
learner guides 169–171                                        140, 144; ADE template 125, 214; adjusting
learner objectives: abstract objectives 99–100, 100,          learning session size 131–132; conceptual
   101; demonstration objectives 99, 100; designer            understanding and 122, 123, 124, 124, 125,
   objectives 100; mid-level ADE process and 88,              127; holistic approach to sequencing 122;
   99–101; performance-based 99                               hybrid sequencing 127; learner control and 127;
learner reaction questionnaire 185, 217                       organizing content and 122, 124, 124, 125; select
learning: active 59; affective domain and 43, 156;            and sequence organizing content 122; sequencing
   applying skills 42–43; attitudes and values 43;            organizing content 127; theoretical understanding
   blended 82; categories of 41–42; competency-               and 122, 123, 125–126, 126, 127
   based 60; experiential 60; higher-order 43; hybrid
   82; inquiry-based 61; instructional context for 55;      maker-based learning 62
   instructional theories and 46–47; maker-based 62;        management function 192–193
   memorization and 41–42; motivational strategies          Masia, B.B. 43, 156
   for 63–65; problem-based 60–61; project-based            mastery-based instruction 80–81
   61; scenario-based eLearning and 62–63; self-            mastery criteria 128, 129, 145
   paced eLearning 63; social and emotional (SEL)           Mayer, R.E. 169
   43; task-centered 61–62; taxonomies and 41, 42;          McClelland, D. 64
   teacher-centered 60; ten steps to complex 48, 49;        measurable verbs 100–101, 101
   types of 128, 130; understanding relationships 42        media production 165–167, 167; see also instructional
learning analysis 128                                         media
learning by doing 60, 103                                   media selection: cost-effectiveness 109; existing
learning engineers 8                                          instructional resources 110; feasibility and 66, 82;
learning management systems (LMS) 164; see also               flexibility and 65; ideal 66, 83; learner preferences
   course management systems                                  109; mid-level ADE process and 66, 106–110;
learning plans 169                                            performance and feedback capabilities 109;
learning sessions 130–132                                     practical usage 109; production time and expense
learning theories 43–46                                       109; rules for 108–109; sensory channels 108;
linear procedures 116–117, 118                                top-level ADE process and 82–83; types of media
linear sequence 75                                            106–107, 107, 108
lower-level ADE process: assessments 137–138;               medical education 60
   coaching strategies 136; copyright considerations        memorization 41–42
   and 133; designing and developing instruction            Merrill, M.D. 13, 41, 47–48
   132; dimensions of divergence 138, 138; exercises        Merrill’s First Principles of Instruction 48–49
   for 140–141; expert review 132; formative                Merrill’s taxonomy 41, 42
   evaluation 132, 138–139; implementation of               metacognitive skills 43
   instruction and 132; implementation plan 139;            methods review 177
   instructional formats and 134, 135; instructional        mid-level ADE process: authentic scenarios and 94,
   strategies 137, 143–159; motivational strategies           94, 96, 104–105, 105, 106; categorizing difficulty
   137; organizing content 115–127; project                   of variations 94–96; content levels 89; designer
   management plan and 139; rapid prototyping (RP)            objectives and 88, 93–94, 95, 96, 97; designing
   and 121, 127; resource requirements 132–134;               learning by doing 103–105; exercises for 112–114;
   review of existing materials 133, 133; revision            expert review and 99, 110; formative evaluation
   and 134; scaffolding design 134–136, 136; select           and 99, 110; identify and sequence major content
   and classify supporting content 128; sequencing            88–93; identifying variations in applications
   supporting content 129–132; supporting content             95–96, 97; identifying variations in tasks 93–94,
   115, 128, 130; supporting content template 129;            94; learner assessments and 101–103, 104; learner
   see also lower-level task expertise; lower-level topic     objectives and 88, 99–101; media selection
   expertise                                                  106–110; project management (PM) plans and 110;
lower-level task expertise: ADE process and 116,              rapid prototyping (RP) and 91, 93, 99, 101; see also
   140, 144; ADE template 123, 213; adjusting                 mid-level task expertise; mid-level topic expertise
   learning session size 130–132; analyzing                 mid-level task expertise: ADE process for 89,
   branching procedural tasks 119, 121; analyzing             113; ADE template 111, 211; content levels 89;
224 Index
  designing learning by doing 103–105; designing          preparing for 203–204; summative evaluation and
  simple-to-complex/branching sequences of                203–204, 204, 205
  versions 91, 91; holistic instructional sequences    performance gap analysis 23, 24, 25, 25, 27, 27
  and 89–90; identifying variations in tasks 93–94,    performance opportunity analysis 23–24
  94; identifying versions of tasks 90; simplifying    performance strategies 149–150, 150, 152
  conditions for 90, 90                                performance technology (PT) 26
mid-level topic expertise: ADE process and             physical objects 108
  88–89, 89, 91–98, 113; ADE template 112,             Piaget, J. 45
  212; categorizing applications by difficulty         pictures and text 106
  98; categorizing difficulty of variations 96;        Piskurich, G.M. 82
  conceptual/theoretical understanding and 92,         Plato 5
  93; content levels 89; designing learning by doing   predictive assessments 102
  105–106; designing sequence of applications          pre-instructional design: ID project planning 28–30;
  92, 92, 93; identify and sequence applications          instructional interventions 25–26; instructional
  91–92; identifying applications of 91; identifying      needs assessment 25, 27–28, 29; non-instructional
  variations in 95, 97                                    interventions 26; performance analysis 23–25;
military services 4                                       performance gap analysis 23–24, 24, 25, 25, 27
mnemonics 146                                          prerequisites first 130, 131
Molenda, M. 54                                         principle-using skills 42
Morrison, Ross, and Kemp Model 10–11, 11               printed text 106
motivational strategies: ARCS model and 64, 137,       problem-based instruction 60n2
  137; extrinsically motivated behavior and 63–64;     problem-based learning (PBL) 60–61, 60n2, 171
  intrinsically motivated behavior and 63–64; needs    procedural content 115–116, 130
  theory and 64; Octalysis and 65; role in learning    procedural tasks 116–117, 117
  137; self-determination theory (SDT) 64–65           procedure-using skills 42
multimedia learning principles 170                     process evaluation xiii, 32–33, 174, 186
Myers, R.D. 136                                        producing 143, 163
                                                       product evaluation xiii, 174, 176–177
natural process 126                                    project-based learning 61
natural-process relationships 42, 150–151, 151, 152    project environment 103–104
needs theory 63–64                                     project management (PM): CIPP method and 31;
non-instructional interventions xii, 26, 26               defining 30; elements of ID plan 32; ID project
norm-referenced assessments 101                           planning 30–33, 36, 172; initiating phase 30–31;
                                                          lower-level ADE process and 139; mid-level
Octalysis 63, 65, 137                                     ADE process and 110; planning phase 31–32;
online instruction 163                                    process evaluation and 32–33; process evaluation
operant conditioning 157                                  plan 33; process of 30, 31; resource analysis and
operational evaluation 174, 175, 181–183                  55–56; SWOT analysis and 31
operational tryouts 181–183                            Project Management Institute 28
organizing content: add supporting content to          PT see performance technology (PT)
   129–130; conceptual understanding and 122, 124,
   124–125; examples of 117; graphic representation    qualitative reduction xii, 58–59
   of 124; heuristic 115–116; hybrid sequencing 127;   quantitative reduction xii, 58
   learner control and 127; procedural tasks and       questionnaires: advantages/disadvantages of 198;
   115–117; sequencing lower-level 127; sequencing       distribution of 200–201, 202; guidelines for
   mid-level 115–116; theoretical understanding and      constructing 199–200; guidelines for developing
   122, 125–126, 126                                     questions 198–199; guidelines for preparing
orienting context analysis 54–55                         an introduction 200; learner reaction 185, 217;
                                                         mutually exclusive responses in 200; preparing
pacing strategies 81, 81                                 198; stages of questionnaire development 199;
Pavlov, I.P. 44                                          summative evaluation and 198–199; types of 198
pebble-in-the-pond model 13, 13
performance analysis 23–25, 27                         R&A see Rothwell & Associates (R&A)
performance assessments 102                            rapid prototyping (RP): benefits of 58; client
performance-based objectives 99                           feedback and 11; combination approach and 59;
performance evaluations: advantages/disadvantages         effectiveness and 11–12; formative evaluation and
  of 204; conducting 204; data analysis and               59; ID process and 58; lower-level ADE process
  reporting 204–205; evaluating results 205;              and 121, 127; mid-level ADE process and 91, 93,
                                                                                                   Index    225
   99, 101; model for 12; qualitative approach to         social learning theory 45, 63
   74–75, 77–78, 91, 93; qualitative reduction and        soft technology 3
   xii, 58–59; quantitative approach to 74, 77, 91, 93,   storyboards 168
   99, 101, 127; quantitative reduction and xii, 58;      Strobel, J. 61
   revision and 58–59; top-level ADE process and          Stufflebeam, D.L. 195
   76, 79                                                 subject-matter experts (SMEs) 57, 57, 58, 92
reactive skills 43                                        summative evaluation: CIPP method and 195;
Reigeluth, C.M. 41, 47, 53, 136                              continuing 174, 195; exercises for 206; field visits
reinforcement theory 44                                      201–203, 203; ID process and xiii; initial 174,
remembering information: control strategies for 146,         195; Kirkpatrick Model for 195–198; overview of
   147; criteria for mastery 145; feedback and 146;          195; performance evaluations 203–204, 204, 205;
   instructional strategies and 143–146; mnemonics           questionnaires in 198, 198, 199, 199, 200, 200,
   and 146; practice and 145; presentation and               201, 202; reactionnaires and 196, 196
   145; primary strategies for 145–146; secondary         support function 191–192
   strategies for 146, 146                                supporting content: adding to organizing content
resource analysis 55–56                                      129–130; adjusting learning session size 130–132;
review of existing materials form 133, 216                   coordinating concepts together 130; criteria for
revision: expert review and 177; formative                   mastery 128, 130; examples of 117; experienced
   evaluation and 83–84, 99, 110, 171–172, 177, 186;         instructors and 128; identifying down to entry
   individual tryouts and 180; operational tryouts           level 128; just-in-time 130; kinds of learning
   and 183; rapid prototyping (RP) and 58–59; small          and 128; lower-level ADE document 129, 215;
   group tryouts and 181                                     prerequisites first 130, 131; procedural order 130;
Richey, R. C. 54, 79                                         selecting and classifying 128; sequencing 129–132;
Rogers, P.C. 12                                              task versions 131; topic versions 131–132; types
Romiszowski, A.J. 14, 43, 53, 66, 108                        of 115; types of learning and 130; understanding
Rothwell & Associates (R&A) 7                                first 130
routine skills 42–43                                      SWOT (strengths-weaknesses-opportunities-thre
Russell, J.D. 54                                             ats) 31, 84
Ryan, R.M. 64
                                                          Talks to Teachers on Psychology (James) 5
Saye, J.W. 135                                            task-centered instruction (TCI) 61–62
scaffolding design 134–136, 136                           task expertise: ADE process for 67, 158, 178;
scenario-based eLearning 62–63                               formative evaluation and 178; goal-oriented
schema theory 44–45                                          knowledge and 53; top-level ADE process and
Science of Learning and the Art of Teaching, The             73; training and 52–53; see also lower-level task
   (Skinner) 4                                               expertise; mid-level task expertise; top-level task
“Science of Winning, The” (Gilbert) 24                       expertise
scope continuum 73–74, 76                                 teacher-centered instruction: case-based instruction
scripting 143, 163                                           (CBI) and 62; criterion-referenced assessments
scripts 168                                                  and 102; developing instructor guides 171;
scriptwriting 167–168                                        predictive assessments and 102; standardization
self-determination theory (SDT) 64–65                        and conformity in 59–60; timing for instruction
self-directed learning 81                                    145; top-level ADE process and 81; type of
self-paced eLearning 63                                      instruction and 163
skills: applying 42–43; concept-classification 42;        technology 3; see also educational technologies;
   control strategies for 155, 156; higher-order             instructional media
   43; instructional strategies and 143, 153–154;         technology-enhanced instruction 169, 170
   interactive 43; metacognitive 43; primary              Technology of Teaching, The (Skinner) 5
   strategies for 154, 154, 155; principle-using 42;      templates: learner reaction questionnaire 185, 217;
   procedure-using 42; reactive 43; routine 42–43;           lower-level supporting content 129, 215; lower-
   secondary strategies for 155, 155; transfer 43            level task expertise template 123, 213; lower-level
Skinner, B.F. 4–5                                            topic expertise template 125, 214; mid-level
Smaldino, S.E. 54                                            task expertise template 111, 211; mid-level topic
SMART (Specific, Measurable, Achievable,                     expertise template 112, 212; review of existing
   Relevant, and Timely) 101                                 materials form 133, 216; top-level task expertise
social and emotional learning (SEL) 43, 156                  template 77, 209; top-level topic expertise
social cognitive theory 45                                   template 80, 210
social constructivism 45                                  Tessmer, M. 54, 79
226 Index
theoretical understanding: defining 42; examples in           sequence of 75; rapid prototyping (RP) and 74;
  biology 93; instructional strategies and 146; mid-          scope continuum and 73–74; select and sequence
  level topic classification 92; natural process and          big-picture 73–75, 76; subtasks 73; versions of
  126; organizing content and 122, 123, 125–126,              tasks 73
  126, 127; schemas and 42                                 top-level topic expertise: ADE process and 73,
topic expertise: ADE process for 67, 158, 178;                76–79, 85; ADE template 80, 210; analyzing
  education and 52–53; formative evaluation and               each domain to identify subjects 76; analyzing
  178; general knowledge and 53; see also lower-level         each subject to identify topics 76–78; chunking
  topic expertise; mid-level topic expertise; top-            subjects and topics 79; description continuum and
  level topic expertise                                       76; examples of domains, subjects, and topics 78;
top-level ADE process: CIPP method and 84;                    rapid prototyping (RP) and 77; scope continuum
  course management systems and 83; delivery                  and 76; select and sequence big-picture 76–79;
  methods and 82–83; designing duty and task                  sequence design for subjects and topics 78–79, 78
  sequences 75–76, 75; exercises for 86; expert            training: competency-based learning and 60;
  review and 84; formative evaluation and 83–84;              corporate 55, 59–60; defining 3; education vs.
  instructional goals and 72; instructional methods           52; game-based 63; instructional approaches and
  and 72; learner-centered instruction and 81;                59–60; interactive e-learning and 72–73; mastery
  mastery and 80–81; media selection 82–83;                   approach to 80–81; military services and 3–4; task
  pacing strategies 81, 81; planning big-picture              expertise and 52–53
  instructional methods 79–83; project management          transfer context 55
  plan and 84; redesigning 84; revision and 83–84;         transfer skills 43
  select and sequence big-picture content 73–75,
  77, 76–79; SWOT analysis and 84; task expertise          understanding 41–42, 130
  content levels 74; task vs. topic expertise 73;          universal education 5
  teacher-centered instruction and 81; templates for
  83; see also top-level task expertise; top-level topic   values 43
  expertise                                                van Barneveld, A. 61
top-level task expertise: ADE process and 85; ADE          Van Merriënboer, J.J.G. 48
  template 77, 209; analyzing duty tasks 74–74, 75;        video 106–107; see also instructional media
  analyzing job duties 74; branching sequence of
  75; chunking 76; content levels 74; description          workplace behavior 26
  continuum and 73–74; different perspectives on
  duties 74, 74; duty analysis and 74–75, 75; linear       Zemke, R. 13
