Your Guide to
Blueprinting        by Erik Flowers &
The Practical Way   Megan Erin Miller
This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information in regard to the
subject matter covered. While the authors have used their best efforts in preparing this book,
they make no representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy or completeness of
the contents of this book and specifically disclaim any implied warranties of merchantability or
fitness for a particular purpose. The advice and strategies contained herein may not be suit-
able for your situation. You should consult with a professional when appropriate. Neither the
publisher nor the author shall be liable for any loss of profit or any other commercial damages,
including but not limited to special, incidental, consequential, personal, or other damages.

YOUR GUIDE TO BLUEPRINTING THE PRACTICAL WAY

by Erik Flowers and Megan Erin Miller

First Edition © 2022 by Practical by Design. All rights reserved.

Cover design and interior artwork by Megan Erin Miller

www.practicalbydesign.co

This book is also published in a variety of electronic and physical formats. Some content that
appears in print may not be available in electronic books.

No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted
in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning, or
otherwise, without the prior written permission of the author, except for use of brief passages
in a book review or as a reference.

ISBN 9798844640353
                Praise for Practical by Design
Blueprinting helped me unpack and showcase an existing process            Amazing, simply amazing! From just a short course I was able to
and allow people to visualize the troubles of our users. It helped the    deep dive into processes within my organization and fully understand
business side create a new process.                                       the problems throughout the journey, identifying tactical and
                                                                          strategic changes for improvement.
—Principal Manager, Business Transformation, Government
                                                                          —Digital Transformation Manager, Gov. Services
Practical Blueprinting gave me the right language to get the buy-in
from leadership and stakeholders. The template was easy and               I am new to service design, and the course was very fluid and
allowed us to externalize things that were boxed up institutional         simple to understand. I was able to apply the method with an auto
knowledge and collectively raise the business acumen for everyone.        manufacturer in a 3-day workshop. The plan and ideation that came
That was priceless. The blueprint became a conversation piece             out of the effort were phenomenal and appreciated and owned by
driving healthy conversations and conflicts that elevated the quality     the CEO.
of collaboration.                                                         —Principal Consultant, Consulting
—Innovation Strategist, Consulting
                                                                          As a lawyer, blueprinting helps me provide better services to my
It’s easy to talk about customer journeys. It is difficult to map them.   clients, and helps me think about how I create my own services in a
But using Practical Blueprinting makes it easier.                         frictionless manner.

—Chief Service Officer, Information Technology Consulting                 —Partner, Law Firm


We transformed our entire global talent-acquisition organization          I loved everything about the Practical Blueprinting course. It was well
strategy using service design that started with a blueprinting session!   designed, and takes the method of the blueprint and strips away all
                                                                          the formalities to identify issues fast. The heat map effect allows for
—UX Researcher, Technology and Manufacturing
                                                                          quick identification of what needs the most attention.

Blueprinting has helped us create rituals to eliminate silos and          —Event Designer, Self Employed
guarantee that our efforts are client-centered.
                                                                          I really enjoyed this course. It’s not very often that you can get this
—Head of Design, Corp. Development and Digital Transformation
                                                                          in-depth look at how to use a methodology and to see it in action.

The Practical Blueprint helped me enormously to design better             —Course Taker
interactions with clients of our commercial programs. Thanks to it, we
improve satisfaction by more than 150%.                                   Each section was easy and quick to digest, and I appreciate all the
                                                                          tools that you also include in the process of learning!
—Head of Sales Excellence, Global Marketing Firm
                                                                          —Course Taker
Practical Blueprinting provided me with a framework which I could
use to engage my colleagues and add the right amount of friction to       This is a super accessible course. You did a great job of explaining
each step by forcing us to consider all the requirements to deliver it.   simple ways to address complex problems. And using legos for the
                                                                          mock sessions is genius. All around, very fun and educational!
—Co-Founder & Service Designer, Healthcare Services
                                                                          —Course Taker
Ultimately, blueprinting guided alignment within the department and
what new resources were missing for new hires during onboarding.          Loved it!! I thought it was the most practical course I’ve taken. I liked
                                                                          how you walked through the blueprinting process step by step. I feel
—Service Designer, Travel Rewards company
                                                                          like I can run a blueprinting process next week!

It brought teams together, broke down silos, and brought out              —Course Taker
empathy. It made people realize that there were many things that
they did not know, and gave a focus on what to act on.                    The tone, style, and content in the course was really engaging.
                                                                          The process is a big improvement on how we were doing things,
—Service Designer & Research Manager, Global B2B
                                                                          particularly because you took it all the way through making the
                                                                          results actionable. Thanks for that!

                                                                          —Course Taker
Contents


Introduction to Blueprinting					11
  What is an experience blueprint?					                          12
  The value of blueprinting						14
  The lens of the experience						15
  When to blueprint							16
  What you can blueprint						17
  Frontstage and backstage						18
  How blueprinting is unique compared to other methods		         20
  Blueprinting vs. Journey Mapping					21

Current-state vs. future-state blueprinting			                   27
  Current-state blueprinting: why, when, and how to prepare		    29
  Future-state blueprinting: why, when, and how to prepare		     32
  Going from current-state to future-state with blueprinting		   36

The format of a blueprint						39
  Scenarios to blueprint						40
  Phases and the experience lifecycle					                       45
  Steps of the scenario						50
  Layers of the blueprint						58

Example Blueprints							63

The process of blueprinting					71
  High level blueprinting process					72

Planning and preparation						79
  Selecting your scenarios						81
  Identifying who to invite 						81
  Preparing scenarios for blueprinting					84
  How much time will you need					                               85
  Roles for running an effective session					                    87
  Remote, hybrid, and in-person workshop strategies			           88
  Tools for blueprinting						90
Facilitating Blueprinting						95
  Facilitation steps							96
  Top-to-Bottom or Left-to-Right? 					98

Taking action after blueprinting					103
  What to do after current-state blueprinting				                         104
  Current-state blueprinting synthesis process				                        106
  Current-state blueprinting outputs and what to do with them		           108
  What to do after future-state blueprinting				                          110
  Going from workshop to work					                                        112

Common blueprinting questions					115
  Is blueprinting just applied service design?				                        116
  Why “Practical” Blueprinting (vs. traditional service blueprinting)?	   116
  Why did you rename the service blueprint?				                           117
  How many scenarios do I really need?				                                118
  Can I use the blueprint if I am a UX or product designer?		             119
  Can I use the blueprint if I am (insert your role here)?			             120
  Making a blueprint a living document					                               121
  Are there other ways to modify the blueprint format?			                 122
  Is a blueprint a pretty map I can show to stakeholders?		               124
  How do I get my organization to let me blueprint?			                    125

Conclusion								127

Glossary								131
  Key terms								131
  Methods								133
Introduction
When we published our original Guide to Practical Service Blueprinting
in November 2015, we were blown away by the response and have since
been amazed at the continued use of the guide as an introduction to
service design and one of its core methodologies.

Since then, we’ve continued to grow and evolve the method in real work
settings, publish canonical blog posts on the topic, and teach thousands of
people around the world how to use blueprinting through workshops and
our first online course, which launched in 2017.

This new and significantly expanded guide to blueprinting contains
updated content, taking you deeper into the method, and covers both
current and future state blueprinting.

We are so excited to share our knowledge and experience with you, and
hope that you find it transformative for your work, your organizations, and
your customers.

Happy blueprinting!

— Megan & Erik
More than a book.
More than a method.
A practical practice.
We started this business in 2015 with the inten-
tion of making the process of service blueprinting
easier to learn and easier to take action from after
running into challenges and a lack of available resources that went beyond
the academic. This was the origin of Practical by Design.

We focus on practical methods that make it easier to do design, innovation,
and strategy. Through Practical by Design, we are promoting a new prac-
tical way of working, developed on the job from real-world challenges with
the aim of transforming our work, our careers, our organizations, and our
customer’s success.

This is the first of what we plan as a series of books that break down
actionable methods, frameworks, and mindsets. At the core of everything
we teach is the principle of applicability: if it’s not actionable, it’s not
practical.



More help is available!
We understand that sometimes a book isn’t enough,
no matter how much the authors put into it. We know
this because we’re just like you, practictioners looking
to grow their skills and learn from others.

This is why we created our online learning project,
starting with the “Introduction to Practical Service
Blueprinting” course (renamed as “Introduction to Current State
Blueprinting”).

Sometimes, you simply want to hear a voice, follow along with a lesson,
and do more than just read. You want to expand your capabilities and
level-up. Check out our availabe—and coming soon—courses that this
book complements.
Companion Courses
Available now: Current-State Experience Blueprinting
Map out key scenarios. Solve end-to-end problems. Facilitate and synthesize
your first current state blueprinting session!

You will learn what it takes to organize and run a current-state service blue-
printing workshop, synthesize the output and generate actionable work for
your organization, and grow your service design skills as a trained service
blueprinting facilitator!

•	 What a current state blueprint is    •	 How to plan out your service
   and what it’s good for!                 blueprinting project
•	 Each step of the blueprinting        •	 How to facilitate and synthesize a
   process, from planning to taking        blueprinting session
   action                             •	 What to do with the output of your
•	 How to identify your opportunity      blueprint and how to take action
   spaces, scenarios, and touchpoints •	 Conducting your working sessions
•	 What makes up the front stage and      and workshops digitally or in-
   backstage components                   person



Coming soon: Future-State Experience Blueprinting
Map your vision into reality. Turn your design into an actionable implemen-
tation plan. Learn how to facilitate a future state blueprinting process!

You will learn what it takes to organize and run a future state blueprinting
process, facilitate a blueprinting session virtually, synthesize the output
and generate actionable work for your organization to implement the new
design, and grow your skills as a trained blueprinting facilitator!

Due out Late 2022, early 2023! It’s a big one!



Discount code                                            For 20% off courses and
Use discount code: BPDIGITAL to get 20% off                templates use code:
                                                            BPDIGITAL
template kits and courses!


Visit pbd.pub/courses
Chapter One

Introduction to
Blueprinting
We live in an increasingly complex world. Organizations face existen-
tial challenges and are navigating change at an unprecedented pace.
Workplaces have been turned on their heads with increased remote work,
remote customers, permeability between services and products, and
ever-increasing expectations from both employees and customers in what
organizations offer and the values that they adhere to. This dramatic trans-
formation happening worldwide has changed the way shoppers shop,
customers buy, visitors visit, and how designers design! It’s not just the
nature of work that has evolved, the nature of our customers has too.

We need new tools to become more nimble and embed human-centric
values deeper into how we work. While there are many ways to invest time
and resources into customer experience, human-centered design, and
employee experience, one method stands above the rest as a fantastic
way to improve our services, products, and businesses with the experience
in mind, and that tool is Practical Experience Blueprinting.




                                                                               11
                           What is an experience
                           blueprint?
                           Experience Blueprinting (known also as service blueprinting) is a way to
                           look at how the business is delivering an experience. It allows organi-
                           zations to look through the lens of the experience to understand the
                           “behind the scenes” of the business—the underlying people, policies,
                           processes, systems, and touchpoints that create the resulting experi-
                           ence. This “end-to-end” and “surface-to-core” view of how the experience
                           is delivered is essential to both improving current-state experiences and
                           designing new ones.




                           What’s unique to blueprinting as a methodology (vs. process mapping or
                           journey mapping for example) is that it looks both at the experience and
                           the delivery together, and through it we aim to stay customer-centric in
                           how we understand, assess, design, and plan the backstage operations of
                           the business.

                           The intent is to stay customer-centric, but paradoxically, the blueprint
                           focuses on mapping almost everything but the customer experience.
                           To understand this, think about how your organization is a system that
                           produces services and offerings for your customers. In order to improve


12   Your Guide to Blueprinting the Practical Way
  their experience, you have to delve into all the dimen-       A blueprint is a map of
  sions of the business system, and this is what the            how your organization
  experience blueprint does best—it connects the
                                                                delivers the experience
  dots between the experience, and looks through it
  as a lens into the business. By using the blueprinting
                                                                of a service or
  format, you are baking in customer centricity in how          product offering.
  you organize and run your business.

  Blueprinting is a tool that—unlike process mapping, journey mapping,
  etc.—lets you see how your organization functions as a holistic system.
  The product or service offerings your customers encounter can only be as
  good as the systems that produce them.

  Imagine that your customers’ experiences are like a patient complaining
  to a doctor about how their elbow hurts every time they play tennis. The
  customer’s words spoken aloud to the doctor of how and where the elbow
  hurts are like the customer journey. An x-ray and MRI of the elbow is the
  blueprint. Both are valid, but they are different ways of
  understanding the pain.
                                                                Blueprinting is
  And much like the difference between a detailed               customer centric
  story of how your elbow hurts when your tennis                business systems
  racket whacks that ball across the net vs. an x-ray
                                                                mapping.
  of your elbow, the former tells a vivid story and is
  cheap to produce. The latter has much more detail
  and validity as a diagnostic tool, but costs a lot more (especially if you are
  buying your first x-ray machine!).


What you get from experience blueprinting

•	 Current State Blueprinting for improving existing experiences: actionable
  improvement opportunities for both the frontstage customer experience and
  the backstage operations

•	 Future State Blueprinting for newly envisioned experiences: an actionable
  implementation plan for how to build the operational foundation needed to
  deliver new experiences




                                                                              Introduction to Blueprinting   13
                              Simply speaking, blueprinting is a detailed visual mapping method. It is
                              done in a group setting to create a visual representation of the various
                              aspects of business operations that are the foundation for delivering an
                              experience. While this method does result in a “physical” blueprint, the true
                              value of the method is in the conversation that this facilitates across stake-
                              holders, and the actionable insights that the process results in.



                              The value of blueprinting
                              Blueprinting helps you see how customers experience what your business
                              delivers. This perspective enables you to effectively change the way your
                              organization delivers your service or offering for the better. Because of this,
                              blueprinting supports the improvement of internal operations just as much
                              as it supports the improvement of customer experiences.

                              We believe blueprinting is one of the best ways to inspire your organiza-
                              tion to act in a new way, to approach problems differently, and to deliver
                              experiences better than ever before. It is through shared understanding
                              and a holistic perspective that teams gain the meaningful insights needed
                              to transform customer and employee experiences. We believe that the
                                                       internal processes and systems of your organiza-
                                                       tion are what produce—and paradoxically, constrain
     A blueprint is not just
                                                       the success of—the touchpoints and interactions
     an artifact; it is a means                        of the customer experience. The experience your
     to drive change.                                  customers have and the systems that produce what
                                                       they interact with are inextricably linked. You cannot
                              affect one without affecting the other.

                              Blueprinting is especially effective when you are dealing with “wicked”
                              problems that are particularly hard to diagnose and need a holistic
                              approach to uncover the root cause of the problem. It is the perfect
                              method for approaching experiences that are cross-channel, involve
                              multiple touchpoints, and are the result of a cross-functional effort
                              composed of many teams and stakeholders behind the scenes. And let’s
                              be honest. This is more and more of the reality of all our services, products,
                              and offerings! Because of this, blueprinting works great for ecosystem-level
                              scenarios that span across a web of offerings.


14      Your Guide to Blueprinting the Practical Way
The blueprint maps systems and scenarios, looking through a chosen
“experience” lens, yet these business systems result in many potential
experiences. This is one of the huge benefits of the blueprinting format, as
it allows you to uncover the underlying business systems that need to be
improved and optimized to enable a better ecosystem of experiences. This
is a practical application of systems thinking to fix scenarios that result in
better customer experiences.



The lens of the experience
One of the true values of this method is its flexibility to look through the
lens of the experience (for whoever this is defined) in order to “unpack”
what is underneath.

The experience viewed through this lens could be thought of as a tradi-
tional “customer’s experience” in a busi-
ness-to-customer relationship. However,
                                                      A blueprint looks through
blueprinting can be used to pick any role
as the primary lens through which to view
                                                      the lens of the experience
the business. To this end, blueprinting can           at how the business is
help you to improve employee experiences,             delivering that experience.
or address many internal issues where
teams within an organization are providing
“services” or support to other roles and teams. Depending on what
problem you want to solve, you get to pick the primary “experience lens”
through which to blueprint the business operations.

As noted above, you can’t fix painful and broken customer experiences (or
create delightful net-new experiences) by solely focusing on the customer
experience itself. You have to look deeply at what is producing it.

Like an amusement park, what the riders of the roller coaster see is the
thrill of their ride, but the customer doesn’t see or think about the gears
and guts of the mechanics that pull the cars up the track the, or the physics
and mathematics behind the g-forces, the curvature of the tracks, or the
acceleration—all tested to reduce motion sickness and optimize thrill
months or years in advance. If a rider gets sick during the biggest g-force
curves, you could focus on treating their symptoms proactively by offering

                                                                              Introduction to Blueprinting   15
                           motion sickness medications when they enter the park, OR you could do a
                           deep-dive into the track and figure out which curve is causing the sickness
                           and how to modify the track to address it.




                           When to blueprint
                           Blueprinting is what we consider a “keystone” method, meaning, a method
                           used at critical junctions in your organization to help create alignment
                           on design, strategy, and implementation. If we imagine a continuous cycle
                           of discovery, strategy, design, implementation, and assessment, blue-
                           printing fits in two primary places: during discovery as a way to better
                           understand and evaluate current-state, and during design as a way to
                           envision how the organization might deliver a new experience.



                                                                 Current State Blueprinting
                                                                 helps you better understand
                                                                 how the experience is delivered
                                Discovery

              Measure                                Strategy


                                                                        Future State Blueprinting
                   Implement                        Design              helps you transition from
                                                                        Design to Implement




16   Your Guide to Blueprinting the Practical Way
  Whether you are in a service designer, product manager, or other busi-
  ness role, you might consider how your organization could adopt using this
  method as a standard way of understanding, aligning, and designing
  experience delivery. In the next chapter, we will talk through use cases for
  when current-state and future-state blueprinting are the right tools.



  What you can blueprint
  Blueprinting is an extremely flexible tool and can be applied to a wide
  range of experiences (or scenarios)—really anything that can be looked at
  end-to-end as a story over time that has resulted from a system.


Different kinds of experiences you can blueprint

•	 The experience a customer has with services, products, and other offerings

•	 Employee experiences and other internal support within an organization

•	 “Mandatory” experiences—like government, compliance driven processes

•	 Events, conferences, workshops, trainings or other live programs

•	 You can even apply blueprinting to your personal life! (think: travel, birthday
  parties—what processes, systems, actors need to be in place?)



  Let’s take this a little further. Really, what we are talking about is a linear
  scenario through time with a main “subject” that is “experiencing” or going
  through this scenario. The many factors and systems components that
  result in that particular set of linear steps of the scenario are what we blue-
  print. Thinking from this angle, you could even blueprint how a tadpole
  becomes a frog, or something even where no living thing is at the center
  of the story—like how a star goes supernova or how ancient organic matter
  turns into crude oil. What matters is there are systems (and interactions
  of multiple discrete subsystems) that make up the larger, interconnected
  components that deliver the experience.

  It’s no coincidence that most companies now refer to what their customers
  experience as an “ecosystem.” That’s not borrowed from psychology,
  that’s biology, ecology.


                                                                                    Introduction to Blueprinting   17
                           Really, you can blueprint anything that results in a linear scenario or story
                           through time, and with this, any experience can be blueprinted (with the
                           right team assembled) to understand how it is delivered—what processes,
                           tools, technology, touchpoints, and policies created the “stage” for the
                           experience to happen.

                           The primary use for blueprinting that we are focusing on is in an organiza-
                           tional context, to improve the experience we are creating for customers,
                           employers, colleagues, or other impacted audiences.

                           For the sake of simplicity, we will primarily use “customer” to refer to the
                           role that is experiencing the service, support, product, or other business
                           offering which we are blueprinting.



                           Frontstage and backstage
                           In order to understand blueprinting as a method, we need to distinguish
                           the frontstage from the backstage.

                           Blueprinting focuses on looking through the frontstage as a viewport into
                           the “invisible” details of the backstage. In this way, blueprinting connects
                           the dots between an experience and the delivery.


                         The frontstage is used to describe everything that the customer experiences
                         when interacting with the business—it is the visible part of the business to the
                         customer.

                         The backstage refers to everything happening behind the scenes in the orga-
                         nization that results in laying the foundation for the customer experience.



                           The literal metaphor is helpful here. If you imagine a simple stage in a
                           theater, the frontstage is where the action happens and what the audience
                           can see. The backstage is where all props, lights, sets, and the crew are
                           doing the work, all of which should be invisible to the audience.

                           Additionally, just as the customer has a “outside of the theater” life—a
                           context, environment, culture, and background—an organization has a
                           similar “behind the scenes” in which culture, beliefs, values, environment,

18   Your Guide to Blueprinting the Practical Way
budget constraints, and other limitations impact the backstage operational
experience delivery.

These stages and their respective “behind the scenes” set the stage
for the organization to deliver a product or service offering, and for the
customer to have their experience.




                                                                             Introduction to Blueprinting   19
                           How blueprinting is unique
                           compared to other methods
                           While Blueprinting does a fantastic job of connecting the dots between
                           the frontstage and the backstage, it is not the primary tool you might use
                           to deeply understand and explore the frontstage experience. For this,
                           user research and journey mapping are better suited. Conversely, there
                           are many additional methods and approaches to improving or designing
                           the backstage of business operations (for example, process mapping).
                           Blueprinting does not replace these methods, instead, it is complementary
                           and often a missing puzzle piece in connecting the two.

                                                    By connecting blueprinting into your existing orga-
You can think of the                                nizational toolkit, you will find it enables actionable
blueprint as being a bridge                         work for improving both the frontstage and back-

between the frontstage                              stage. For example, as an input to blueprinting,
                                                    doing customer research and creating current-state
and the backstage.                                  journey maps are a great way to get ready to blue-
                                                    print and will make your blueprint more accurate as
                           a representation of customer experience. Similarly, understanding organi-
                           zational processes through process mapping can give you a more accu-
                           rate picture of how your organization is handling its operations, and this will
                           benefit your group’s understanding of the backstage. The experience blue-
                           print connects the dots between what is happening to the customer and
                           what is going on behind the scenes.

                           Similarly, as an output of blueprinting, you will want to leverage other
                           design methodologies to design and create a newly improved customer
                           experience based on findings from the blueprinting session (e.g. story-
                           boarding, mapping, wireframes, prototypes), and you will have many new
                           operational backstage changes to implement as well, which may warrant
                           creating future-state process maps or other changes to roles and responsi-
                           bilities, technology systems, policies, and more.

                           The blueprint is the visualization of your scenario or system’s spinal
                           column. It houses the delicate spinal cord and is the central conduit that
                           everything else passes through. When you can see and understand this
                           foundational spine to your scenarios and systems, then the work can begin

20   Your Guide to Blueprinting the Practical Way
where you apply personas, journey maps, process maps, wireframes, etc.,
to the periphery. But, we believe that the practical blueprint is the best way
to map the spine of any system, and can be used across any boundary,
industry, or scenario. And just like working with an actual spine (ouch!), you
need the right instruments and visualizations. We don’t know about you,
but before that surgeon heads in with their scalpel, we’d want them to have
a very good look at those x-rays and MRIs! This is the view that practical
experience blueprinting gets you.



Blueprinting vs. Journey
Mapping
As this is one of the most common questions people have when learning
about blueprinting, we want to spend a little time addressing the difference
between a journey map and an experience blueprint. Rest assured—these
two formats are allies, not redundant. Like adding x-rays to your medical
practice at the turn of the 20th century, new methods require a little more
elaboration and training to know when and when not to use them.


                                                                           Introduction to Blueprinting   21
                             Customer journey mapping and experience blueprinting are two comple-
                             mentary methods that can help us see both sides of our services, prod-
                             ucts, and other offerings.

                                                      Journey mapping helps tell the story of what a
     A journey map is the                             customer went through as a narrative, and contains a

     detailed view of the                             richness of the experience, the highs and lows, that
                                                      a true story would. You can create a journey map by
     frontstage experience.
                                                      interviewing customers, leveraging data and other
                                                      customer input (e.g. tickets, feedback surveys).

                             Beyond capturing the current experience your customers are going
                             through, journey mapping can also be used to imagine and ideate on the
                             desired future state, using the format as a tool to speculate on what a
                             customer might see and do in a future experience.

                             Typically, a journey map is not a depiction of an actual real-world, single
                             customer experience. A journey map is an aggregate of experiences
                             compiled from customer research and the knowledge of subject-matter
                             experts in your organization. The nature of how customers traverse the
                             stage is unique to every single customer, but when you aggregate those
                             paths together into a narrative, it helps you see the experience as an
                             archetypal journey from the customer’s perspective (similar to a persona).

                             This is a powerful storytelling tool that paints a picture and allows people
                             a chance to see something the experience a common lens. Journey
                             mapping builds empathy and also lets you identify areas of the experience
                             that you want to improve or learn more about. With this empathy-building
                             tool, you can socialize the iconic customer journey and let others buy-in to
                             your lens.

                             Where journey mapping focuses on exposing the end-to-end of your
                             customer’s frontstage experience, blueprinting focuses on exposing the
                             surface-to-core of the business that makes up the backstage and behind
                             the scenes of how you deliver and operate, and ties that to the custom-
                             er’s experience. The journey map tells the story of the pain on the patient’s
                             face as they describe how their elbow hurts. Then, you give them the x-ray
                             (the blueprint) to validate and diagnose the specifics.




22     Your Guide to Blueprinting the Practical Way
         Journey Mapping
  Journey mapping is a method that enables us to better understand
 the experience from the customer’s point of view. It typically contains
   several dimensions of information aimed at building empathy and
       documenting the various components of the experience:



LAYER                  DEFINITION                                                        EXAMPLES



Sentiment              A visual representation of the sentiment of                       Using a scale of positive to
                                                                                         negative, a line or icons
                       the customer over the course of the
                       journey

Doing                  What the customer is doing at each step                           "submitting the form" or
                                                                                         "entering the store"




Thinking               What the customer is thinking at each step                        “I am unsure where to find
                                                                                         what I am looking for”




Feeling                What the customer is feeling at each step                         “confused” or “excited”




Touchpoint             What the customer is interacting with                             “store clerk” or “website”




Phase                  Steps of the journey are often organized                          “onboarding” or
                                                                                         “purchasing”
                       into phases




        Get digital, sharable, and printable copies of all reference pages at pbd.pub/posters
                           What journey maps and customer narratives don’t show are the internal
                           workings of the organization. The blueprint seeks to uncover and docu-
                           ment (often for the first time!) all the things that go on beneath the surface
                           and the internal makeup of the organization. It is data visualization of how
                           your company works—the deep, dark inner workings of how the things a
                           customer experiences are actually produced.

                                                    There are huge complexities that go unseen that are the
                                                    support structures beneath every journey—the respon-
Blueprinting unpacks                                sibilities of the internal actors, the systems that support
the surface-to-core of                              those actors, all the processes and policies that dictate
the business that makes                             what can and cannot be done. Blueprinting shows you
                                                    a picture that not only includes the breadth of what
up the backstage.
                                                    happens along the journey, but all the depth that makes
                                                    up the substance that the journey traverses across.

                           Imagine being in the audience of a major Broadway production of the
                           hottest new play. You can very accurately “journey map” your experience
                           as an attendee, from buying your ticket to seeing the play to going home
                           with the crumpled program afterward; but an audience member has no
                           idea what went on behind the curtain to make their experience the way
                           it is. The cost of the set, the contracts with the actors, the faulty sound
                           system that had to be replaced at the last moment, the licensing issues
                           with the playwright…

                           The list is endless, and while a crisp representation of the play’s audience
                           member is important and necessary, but no journey map actually tells you
                           how to fix anything that occurs in the downs, or how to enhance anything
                           that occurs in the ups. While you can use a journey map to envision ways
                           an experience could be improved, this vision only becomes reality when
                           you design the delivery.

                           While journey mapping can help you document surface customer experi-
                           ences, blueprinting helps you “evidence” the reality of your organization.
                           The fundamental value a blueprint provides is an objective picture based
                           on the reality of your organization, what it delivers, and the end-to-end
                           view of how it is orchestrated. That is what the blueprint uncovers—the
                           backstage that is used over and over again by the customers. We map



24   Your Guide to Blueprinting the Practical Way
customer experiences all the time, but rarely do we take the time to map
out our own businesses.

An experience is only as cohesive as the teams that produce it, and any
attempt to make meaningful changes to an experience requires a deep
understanding of the makeup of the organization that builds the stage for
that experience. Blueprinting is not about documenting the customer expe-
rience. It uses the customer experience as a starting point and unpacks it
to expose how the organization supports that journey.

It is important then, before blueprinting, to at least have some idea of what
the experience is that you will blueprint—the end-to-end journeys (which
we refer to as scenarios) that will anchor us in our blueprinting.

But before we get into how to pick which scenarios to blueprint, let’s talk
about the two kinds of experience blueprints you can make: current-state
and future-state.




                                                                          Introduction to Blueprinting   25
Chapter Two

Current-state
vs. future-state
blueprinting
Even though blueprinting looks very similar in process and format when
applying it to improving existing experiences vs. designing new ones, the
function that the blueprint plays is dramatically different in current state vs.
future state!

Current-state blueprinting looks at an existing experience to answer the
following questions:

•	 What is the current customer experience of this service/offering for
  particular scenarios?

•	 How is the organization delivering that experience through processes,
  systems, people, policies, and more?

•	 How might we improve our delivery to support a better experience for
  the customer?

In this way, current-state blueprinting is an “audit” of the current experience
and organizational practices that result in that experience.


                                                                                   27
                           Future-state blueprinting, however, is about inventing something new,
                           both for the customer and the organization.

                           When you are trying to imagine a new offering, there are several factors to
                           consider:

                           •	 What should we be offering? What need does it solve for the customer?
                              Is there a business case for solving that need? Does this fit within our
                              organization’s portfolio, brand, and capabilities?

                           •	 What is the ideal customer experience? What will truly be the best
                              experience that customers wish to have? How might we find this out?
                              How might we test this?

                           •	 How feasible is the ideal experience? Is our blue-sky desired
                              experience realistic to deliver? Do we have the capabilities to deliver it,
                              and if not, what are our gaps?

                           •	 How might your organization deliver the desired experience? How
                              might we pilot this new offering? What could we bootstrap today to test
                              our assumptions? Then how could we scale that implementation to fully
                              offer the service or product? What resources would we need? What
                              realistically can your organization deliver, and when?

                           When you are defining a new offering, you are both imagining an ideal
                           experience for the customer, but also imagining a business model (or
                           service model) that can support consistent, quality delivery of that expe-
                           rience. You are inventing a new offering! There is no aspect of this that is
                           easy. Future-state blueprinting can help your team to balance the tough
                           conversations about resourcing, process, systems, implementation, and
                           support that are necessary in order to create a great, new customer
                           experience.


                          Current-state blueprinting               Future-state blueprinting

                          •	 What exists today                     •	 Inventing something new

                          •	 How delivery creates the              •	 Designing a new experience
                             experience                            •	 Designing how the organization
                          •	 Opportunities for improvement           will deliver




28   Your Guide to Blueprinting the Practical Way
Amazingly, blueprinting can do both current-state and future-state. It is an
incredibly flexible and powerful tool. Next, we’ll go a bit deeper into each
way to use blueprinting.



Current-state blueprinting:
why, when, and how to prepare
Why would you do current-state blueprinting?
Current-state blueprinting is hugely beneficial for organizations that suffer
from “siloed” delivery (who doesn’t?). It brings a cross-functional group
together to gain a shared understanding of what is actually happening front
and backstage, and brainstorm together to solve complex problems.

The benefits of current-state blueprinting are the following:

•	 Make sense of existing, complex systems—when you have inherited or
  stepped into a collection of systems, touchpoints, processes, the current-
  state blueprint can help bring order to what might have been previously
  unbridled chaos.

•	 Shared understanding across business silos of how your organization
  delivers the experience—often organizations aren’t even aware of the
  end-to-end, surface-to-core picture of how they deliver, and what the
  experience is.

•	 Shared understanding of how the backstage results in the customer’s
  experience—by looking end-to-end, you can see how processes,
  systems, or policies might be causing customer pain and explore root
  cause.

•	 Identification of improvement opportunities—both in how to improve
  the customer experience as well as the backstage delivery process.

•	 Alignment across stakeholders—by looking at the service or product
  holistically, we gain a shared organizational understanding and can more
  easily align on directions for improvement.




                                                                Current-state vs. future-state blueprinting   29
                           What you get from current-state blueprinting
                           The output of the current-state blueprinting process is a concrete list of
                           opportunities to improve the experience and the backstage. These could
                           be short-term tactical fixes, or longer-term strategic directions to explore.
                           You would then feed these to the appropriate teams and backlogs, or
                           surface to leadership to move forward at a strategic level. This is your
                           action plan.

                           A more intangible output of current-state blueprinting (yet is often just as
                           powerful as the action plan) is the cross-functional understanding of the
                           holistic, end-to-end of what’s currently happening in the scenario, and the
                           alignment across business silos on the direction you think you should head
                           for improvements.


                           When to make a current-state blueprint
                           Current-state blueprinting can be especially impactful when you have a
                           specific opportunity for improvement, either for the customer or the busi-
                           ness that spans multiple touchpoints, teams, or offerings. When you feel
                           you have an incomplete understanding, or that there is disjointed delivery
                           across business silos, or when you know there is a cumulative impact of
                           the end-to-end system across different areas of the business that you are
                           having trouble improving. Or if there is a high priority problem, or an expe-
                           rience/business breakdown that needs investigating, this is when to bring
                           out the current-state blueprint.

                           A blueprint can help solve for broken, painful, or inconsistent customer
                           experiences where your teams have been having trouble getting to the
                           root of the issue, because perhaps there are more systemic issues going
                           on with your business.

                           It can also help improve inefficiencies in the backstage that might be
                           slowing things down, or help fix breakdowns between business silos, iden-
                           tifying gaps in communication that can manifest themselves in the customer
                           experience. Blueprinting is great for identifying problems upstream that
                           lead to effects felt downstream for the customer.




30   Your Guide to Blueprinting the Practical Way
Blueprinting is a great tool for tackling fuzzy areas where teams aren’t
aligned and aren’t on the same page around your offering, as it creates the
space to hold the right conversations to facilitate improvement.

Additionally, current-state blueprinting is a great foundational tool for
gaining a shared understanding of how things are happening today, and
where the opportunities are to make it better. In this way, doing current-
state blueprinting during discovery can help get that (often for the first
time) holistic view of the business and the experience, and gain a shared
understanding and alignment of your stakeholders. This is a fantastic
activity to do before setting new organizational strategy or priorities.


When to do current-state blueprinting

•	 When there is a concrete customer pain point

•	 When there are inefficiencies or breakdowns behind the scenes that are
  impacting the customer

•	 When teams aren’t aligned or are feeling fuzzy around what current-state is

•	 During discovery—before setting organizational strategy or priorities



Before you make a current-state blueprint…
The main thing you need to decide as an organization before doing a
current-state blueprint is what scenarios you want to blueprint—in other
words, what opportunity spaces in your organization need improvement?
Do you have problematic customer engagement channels? Phases of your
experience that are particularly challenging? Repeat customer support
tickets on a certain issue? Or a particularly confusing or painful operational
delivery that you want to unpack and understand how this connects with
and impacts the customer?

Before current-state blueprinting, you need to decide what to blueprint,
and start to gather enough information to inform your blueprint:

•	 Where does the scenario start and end?—What are the bounds of the
  scenario (what is in scope)? Where are we focusing?




                                                                Current-state vs. future-state blueprinting   31
                           •	 What teams or roles are involved in the end-to-end of the scenario?—
                              You will want to assemble a cross-functional team from these groups/
                              roles to participate in blueprinting.

                           •	 What are the problems we are trying to solve?—What is the core driver
                              for why you want to improve either the experience or the backstage
                              delivery?

                           •	 What is the current experience?—You will want to gather enough real
                              data or customer insights to accurately represent the end-to-end of a
                              typical customer experience for your scenario. Since blueprinting looks
                              through the lens of the experience at the business, this is important as an
                              input to current-state blueprinting.




                           Future-state blueprinting: why,
                           when, and how to prepare
                           Why would you do future-state blueprinting?
                           Conversely, future-state blueprinting is an invaluable and often missing tool
                           to enable cross-functional teams to align on and envision how they might
                           deliver a new or improved experience. It is fundamentally an organizational
                           design activity. It helps us envision the experience we want people to have,
                           and design the way we as an organization might deliver that experience.

                           Here are the reasons you would do future-state blueprinting

                           •	 You’re trying to do something that hasn’t been done before—Green
                              field, blank slate, blue sky… you name it. When you’re starting from
                              square zero, the future-state blueprint is your biggest lever for conscious,
                              sane planning of the complex systems needed to make your new thing a
                              reality.

                           •	 Explore feasibility of the desired experience—Because blueprinting
                              helps you break down all the surface-to-core of your organization’s
                              delivery, doing this with a cross-functional team can help you explore
                              the feasibility of your desired experience from an implementation and
                              support standpoint. Things you thought might be a great idea might be
                              completely impossible to implement.

32   Your Guide to Blueprinting the Practical Way
•	 Adjust the desired experience to match the capabilities of your
  organization—If you discover during blueprinting that your big vision is
  in fact too big, you can use this opportunity to adjust and redefine the
  desired experience to something more feasible. If this happens, you will
  want to make sure to leverage your pre-work on problem framing and
  value proposition to ensure your team stays aligned to your “north star”
  even if you are reducing the “magic” of the service experience you had
  hoped to deliver.

•	 Define an “MVP” of how your organization might deliver the desired
  experience—You can use the blueprinting format to explore and test out
  (hypothetically) a model for delivery, and if you so desire, you can focus
  your team on first defining a minimal implementation instead of going
  after the bigger blue-sky vision. This can be helpful for teams to rapidly
  stand up pilot models to test their concepts.

•	 Gain alignment across all business silos and stakeholders about
  the desired experience, and how will we deliver that experience as
  an organization—By bringing together a cross-functional team to map
  out your new delivery model, you will gain shared understanding and
  alignment across teams as to both what you are trying to deliver to
  the customer, and how you will work together efficiently to deliver that
  experience.

•	 Create a checklist for development and implementation—One of the
  best outcomes of future-state blueprinting is the concrete “checklist” for
  implementation and planning. You literally can “harvest” your blueprint for
  action items to put straight into your project plans and backlogs.


What you get from future-state blueprinting
The output of a future-state blueprint is a first pass of a concrete, action-
able implementation plan that will help you to develop the business’s capa-
bilities to deliver your desired experience. It details out the roles that need
to be defined, the policies that need to be vetted and written, the tech-
nical systems that need to be procured or developed, the processes that
need to get figured out, and the touchpoints that need to get designed and
created. This is extremely actionable and will let you size the work, create
roadmaps, and discuss how the organization will move forward.


                                                                 Current-state vs. future-state blueprinting   33
                           When to make a future-state blueprint
                           Future-state blueprinting is best done when you have a high level idea of
                           what you want the desired future-state experience to be—a vision, story-
                           board, or map of an ideal experience you want to deliver. In other words,
                           if you don’t know what exists today and what experience you are trying to
                           create, you are not ready to do future state blueprinting, as the blueprint
                           is focused on the details of organizational delivery, not on inventing the
                           desired customer experience from scratch.

                           It is great to do future-state blueprinting after you have done current state
                           blueprinting as a way to further define how the improvements you identi-
                           fied in current-state blueprinting will be realized and implemented. If you
                           have both the current and future state blueprints, you can do a gap anal-
                           ysis between the two to create an inventory of all the work you need to do
                           to get from “now” to the “future.”

                           Of course, through the process of blueprinting, you can be iterative, and
                           adjust the customer experience to fit the limitations of the delivery model
                           you are designing. This is a natural part of the process, and why future
                           state blueprinting takes more time than current state blueprinting does.


                           Before you make a future-state blueprint…
                           Because of the complexity of envisioning new experiences and the busi-
                           ness models and structures to support those experiences, you will need
                           more than just future-state blueprinting to help your team through this
                           process.

                           Before you dive into future-state blueprinting, you need to already have
                           defined your desired experience at a high level. The reason is, the blue-
                           printing format works best when you already know what specific steps of
                           the customer experience you want to support. The “meat” of future-state
                           blueprinting is all about breaking down those steps to explore how the
                           organization might be able to deliver that experience. There are a number
                           of techniques you can use to explore what you should be offering and to
                           imagine the future state before you start blueprinting.




34   Your Guide to Blueprinting the Practical Way
We encourage you to consider the following activities before doing
future-state blueprinting

•	 Current-state blueprinting—If you are looking to innovate on a service
  or offering that your organization already provides, it will be hugely
  beneficial to ground yourself on understanding how you currently
  deliver it today. This can lay the foundation for thinking about reinventing
  your current offering into something different. If you do current-state
  blueprinting first, you can also use this to do a gap analysis between
  current and future state for implementation planning.

•	 User research—Go out into the field and learn what problems your
  customers (or potential customers) are having, their pain points, their
  desires. Some techniques you might use are: user interviewing, surveys,
  market research, contextual inquiry. This research should inform the
  foundation of your problem framing, helping you make a clear business
  case for your new offering.

•	 Problem framing—Make sure your organization is aligned on solving the
  right problem for the customer. Don’t just jump at the most obvious thing,
  but instead use abstract laddering, problem tree analysis, or Jobs To Be
  Done to help your team narrow in on the right problem that your service
  will solve for.

•	 Value proposition—Define the value proposition for your new offering.
  What problem is it solving, for who, and what value will it provide? This
  should be your guiding “north star” to help your team stay aligned
  through the future-state design process.

•	 Storyboarding—Leverage your customers and your team to generate
  high-level storyboards that start to define the specific aspects of the ideal
  experience. Sketching different phases of the journey, and playing with
  different types of experiences you might create to satisfy the customer
  need and fulfill your value proposition.

•	 Future-state journey mapping—Going deeper than high-level
  storyboarding, use a journey map format (doing/thinking/feeling) to break
  down the specific steps you think should be part of your future-state
  experience. Get more concrete here and outline all the steps a user
  might take for key scenarios of your service (e.g., learning about your
  service/product, signing up, first-time use, regular use, getting support).


                                                                Current-state vs. future-state blueprinting   35
                           The outcome of these activities is a clear direction for the new offering, and
                           a specific, desired customer experience defined. Once you have this, you
                           can begin to detail out how it will deliver the desired experience. In other
                           words, if you don’t know what experience you want to create, you are
                           not ready to do blueprinting, as it is focused on the details of experience
                           delivery, not on defining the desired future-state experience.



                           Going from current-state to
                           future-state with blueprinting
                           Blueprinting is a powerful tool that bridges business delivery and the expe-
                           rience. It lets you audit the way the experience is delivered today, and
                           plan for how to design and deliver a new or improved experience. There
                           are a few different ways to string together these methods to best suit your
                           organization’s needs.

                           You can focus on moving fast, and rapidly get to action after even just
                           one current-state blueprint exercise… or you can be a bit more deliberate,
                           and do future-state blueprinting after current-state so that you can under-
                           stand the gap between what is today and what could be in the future, and
                           explore how to get there. If you are designing a brand new experience, or
                           want to start from scratch, you may jump in at future-state blueprinting.

                           We can explore this more with a metaphor! Think for a minute about the
                           difference between renovating an old house and building a house from
                           scratch on a bare patch of dirt.

                           A current-state blueprint lets you come up with a plan for rehabbing an
                           worn, well-loved Victorian mansion somewhere along the Maine coast.
                           You can gut it down to the studs if you wanted, but you are still largely
                           constrained by the macro architecture, properties of the original mate-
                           rials used, the foundation it all rests on, and possibly considerations on the
                           street or zoning district. No matter how much you renovate, no one would
                           ever consider it “new” like they would a house built from the literal ground
                           up.

                           There are too many unavoidable and intractable facets to the renovation
                           you simply cannot change—and shouldn’t! The point of a renovation, even

36   Your Guide to Blueprinting the Practical Way
For existing experiences, and moving faster toward fixing things...

             1                           2                             3                                4

    Current State                                            Implement new                       Assess
                                  Action Plan
    Blueprinting                                           experience delivery                improvements

     What exists today       Based on insights, make a   Go forth and make it happen!             Did it work?
                              plan to improve things



For making something new, that builds on something that already exists... 

             1                           2                             3                                4

    Current State                 Future State                                                                           See step
                                                               Gap analysis                      Action Plan             3 above
    Blueprinting                  Blueprinting

     What exists today          Where we want to be      What it would take to get there    A plan to roll out the new
                                                                                              experience delivery



For making something brand new from scratch

             1                           2                             3                                4

     Future State                                            Implement new                       Assess the
                                  Action Plan
     Blueprinting                                          experience delivery                   experience

Imagine how the experience   A plan to implement the     Go forth and make it happen!       Is it a good experience?
     will be delivered       new experience delivery




          a costly one, is that you want to maintain the advantages of what works
          (location, floorplan, historical value) and replace what doesn’t. That is when
          you start with current-state blueprinting.

          Conversely, if you have the opportunity to start building on that bare patch
          of dirt, you’re now building the house without the constraints of what exists,
          and instead replacing those with the constraints of what is possible and
          how to make one choice or another.

          This is the future-state blueprint. Instead of having to deal with some-
          thing that exists and improving it tactically, you’re having to deal with the
          ambiguity of the unknowns and the compromises that arise when you can
          do anything but you can’t do everything. The trick is to understand when
          you should renovate via a current-state blueprint vs. start fresh with a
          future-state.




                                                                                           Current-state vs. future-state blueprinting   37
Chapter Three

The format of a
blueprint
A blueprint has a few key elements to it, regardless of whether you are
doing current-state or future-state blueprinting:

•	 From left to right: A scenario broken down into high-level phases and
  detailed through linear steps (the end-to-end)

•	 From top to bottom: the layers of the blueprint showing the details of
  each step of the scenario (the surface-to-core)

                                                                            Phases
                             The Scenario
                                                                               Steps



                                                                                Layers




                                                                                         39
                           Scenarios to blueprint
                           The scenario is the thing you are blueprinting—the end-to-end linearly
                           through time of the experience and the “invisible” steps happening back-
                           stage to support it. Think of it as the critical path for that particular expe-
                           rience. You are sequencing how the system manifests itself when it is
                           experienced by a customer, not just the customer’s journey. This is an
                           important distinction to become comfortable with, because at first it may
                           not feel like you’re being customer-focused as the bulk of blueprinting
                           focuses on the backstage.

                           Remember—just because you’re not looking solely at the customer expe-
                           rience doesn’t mean you’re not working on improving it or building better
                           systems for them to experience. You’re doing things that may not be
                           directly seen or felt, but act as the substrate and medium that the customer
                           passes through. Like a fish who isn’t aware of water, ensuring it is clean
                           and safe is still critical to that fishy’s experience.

                                                    A scenario is situational, concrete, and specific. This
                                                    matters because what you will unearth through blue-
A scenario is a concrete                            printing is different depending on different scenarios.
story showing the                                   Let’s look at a few examples to illustrate this point.
steps of the experience                             Let’s say you are a store that sells shoes. You might have
and the business                                    multiple brick-and-mortar physical stores in different
linearly through time.                              locations, as well as an online store where people can
                                                    shop for your shoes. Additionally, your shoes might be
                                                    available through Amazon or other distributors.

                           If you think of all the touchpoints that a customer could interact with like
                           an ecosystem, you can imagine there are a myriad of ways for a customer
                           to experience (or traverse) the ecosystem. There is no way we can map
                           and blueprint all the different possible paths and combinations of these
                           unique experiences. However, we can pick impactful ones that will give
                           us coverage of a majority of important touchpoints and business opera-
                           tions. By selecting a smaller handful of impactful scenarios, the other expe-
                           riences not covered will benefit from improvements made, as they likely
                           share many similar touchpoints and systems, processes, and policies.



40   Your Guide to Blueprinting the Practical Way
In our shoe store example, you can’t simply blueprint a customer journey
of “purchasing shoes,” as there are several very different ways a customer
can traverse the ecosystem of the shoe company’s offerings and touch-
points. You need to get more concrete, and select which scenario you want
to blueprint.

For example, we can make the scenario more specific by narrowing it to “a
customer experience purchasing shoes through our online store.” Even this
specificity may not be enough if there are different ways in the online store
to purchase that have different backstage implications.

If you have multiple paths a customer can take, you may want to select
what to blueprint based on analytics, looking at how the majority of
customers purchase shoes in your online store—is it through browsing the
catalog, or through a shoe-picker interactive tool, or through chatting with
a customer representative? Additionally, what if your business also offers
subscription services through your online store (think StitchFix for shoes)?
Each of these is a unique scenario that results in a different blueprint.

•	 Example scenario 1: Purchase shoes in the physical store
  You will want a store manager and frontline service staff representative
  to participate, as well as anyone who handles inventory delivery and
  stocking for the physical store

•	 Example scenario 2: Purchase through browsing the catalog
  You will want your product design team involved in the catalog to be
  present, as well as any engineers or data scientists who are involved in
  developing the algorithms for product display and suggestions in the
  catalog experience


                                                                               The format of a blueprint   41
                           •	 Example scenario 3: Purchase through shoe-picker interactive tool
                              You will want the product owner and designers who made the shoe-
                              picker interactive tool, the developers (as this is likely a specialized team
                              for a feature like this), as well as folks who understand the analytics of
                              how this tool is used, or a user researcher who may have insight into
                              customers using this tool

                           •	 Example scenario 4: Purchase through conversation with chat
                              representative
                              You will want representatives from customer support or actual chat
                              representatives to join your blueprinting session and speak to trends in
                              chat support, as well as how the chat support is run operationally

                           •	 Example scenario 5: Purchase through monthly shoe styling
                              subscription service
                              You will want the business owner for the subscription service, as well as
                              a senior stylist, to speak to how the shoe styling process works, as well
                              as any customer support staff or inventory management staff who are
                              specific to this service.

                           You can see in these above scenario examples how the specifics of the
                           scenario drives who needs to be present at your blueprinting session.
                           While, of course, there will be a lot of overlap, there are nuances that are
                           critically important that certain roles can speak better to.

                           When picking scenarios for current-state blueprinting, remember to
                           ground these in real customer data. You may already have this data in
                           your organization if you collect customer feedback at various points in the
                           journey, or if you have a research team talking to customers. You can also
                           work with customer support or other frontline staff who are subject matter
                           experts and who can accurately represent the customer journey.

                           If you don’t know that your customer journeys are accurate, make sure to
                           validate with customer research first to ensure you are solving a concrete,
                           real-world problem and not just going on assumptions. It is important to
                           understand the customer experience and map that journey as the basis for
                           creating your scenarios.




42   Your Guide to Blueprinting the Practical Way
  How to select scenarios, and how many to pick
  Though this may seem overwhelming to think of all the potential varia-
  tions and unique scenarios you could blueprint, we highly recommend
  that you don’t try to blueprinting everything. Each scenario gives you
  coverage of the experience landscape, and by covering a few key angles
  through different scenarios, you get a majority of the essential touchpoints,
  processes, systems, roles, policies that set the stage for most experiences.

  We take an 80/20 approach to this. Don’t try for 100% coverage—you won’t
  get it or it will take way too long. By looking through a few key scenarios,
  you will capture the bulk of the opportunities for improvement on the
  majority of the business systems involved in delivery—enough to get you
  going and be actionable. In this way, you promote a customer-centered
  approach to iterative and agile business improvement.



We suggest a simple framework for selecting scenarios to blueprint

•	 Primary success path scenarios — What is the primary expected path that
  the majority of customers are experiencing—the most common experience,
  or the experience you want most people to have. We can think of this as the
  “success path” for the experience.

•	 Secondary success path scenarios — Additionally, you might pick some
  secondary “success paths” that have key variations you want to cover (like in
  our shoe store example, if the primary success path is online store purchase,
  secondary paths might be brick-and-mortar, or chat representative).

•	 Problem path scenarios — Lastly, and especially for the current state, you
  will want to pick the “broken” experiences—experience paths that are painful
  and somewhat common (repeatable and known) that you know you need
  to fix. Often these are actually the most fruitful scenarios to blueprint when
  looking at the current state.



  Imagine a bell curve where the center of the curve is a scenario that most
  of your customers experience. On either side of that experience on the
  curve are a few more scenarios that don’t have quite the same volume, but
  they spread out laterally a little more. Then, down toward the sloping edge


                                                                                 The format of a blueprint   43
                           of the bell, you have a scenario or two on either side that encompasses
                           important experiences, but are not anywhere near as populated as the
                           more centrally aligned scenarios.

                           If you take this approach, even the smaller sub-scenarios or variants are
                           going to be caught in that meaty-middle of the curve, and the overlap on
                           the sides captures a great deal of the less-common—but still relatively
                           frequent—scenario experiences. Once you have that, the edge-cases
                           and oddballs won’t have nearly the impact to the aggregate of experi-
                           ences since you’re making a massive impact holistically, even though it’s
                                                      not capturing every discrete case individually.
                                                      It doesn’t have to. This is one of the few times
A few key scenarios will                              when the phrase “a rising tide raises all ships”
give you good coverage of                             isn’t just a clever saying, it’s the fundamental
the experience landscape.                             tenet of why this method works, and why you
                                                      don’t need to blueprint everything.


                           What multiple blueprints get you
                           By blueprinting multiple scenarios (making more than one blueprint), you
                           get multiple dimensions into the business system and how it’s experi-
                           enced. No service or product has a single experience—there are many
                           ways that a customer could experience your offering. So take a handful of
                           key scenarios and blueprint each one. By doing this, you’ll get a triangu-
                           lated view of the bigger picture of your business.

                           When picking scenarios, pick some that are broad enough to have a little
                           overlap to get coverage of the holistic view of your business system. Don’t
                           map out every single customer experience. Instead, choose a handful of
                           the key experiences that might cover the top different experiences you are
                           seeing your customers have.

                           By looking across several blueprints, you get an aggregate view of every-
                           thing you offer and similar kinds of breakdowns and opportunities that are
                           taking place in your organization. This leads to insights that are more
                           scenario-agnostic and can help assist with more systemic issues in your
                           organization.




44   Your Guide to Blueprinting the Practical Way
  Phases and the experience
  lifecycle
  IIt is helpful to organize your scenario into higher level phases to ground
  your understanding of the scope and bounds of the scenario (where does
  it start and end), and also because different phases are often owned by
  different parts of the business, and you will need different people to join
  the blueprinting session depending on the phase. Phases can also help
  you break up the blueprint into more manageable chunks and focus on
  higher priority sections.

  Both services and products follow a high level standard experience life-
  cycle that we can use as a guide to discussing and selecting impactful
  scenarios to focus on. Your scenario might cross a few key phases of the
  experience lifecycle, or cover the entire thing end-to-end if your product or
  service experience is less complex.


  Scenarios across the product ←→ service landscape
  In the previous section, we walked through a wide range of different
  scenarios for how a customer might experience purchasing shoes. These
  scenarios span what we call the product ←→ service landscape.




Read our article “The Difference Between a Product and a Service – As Told With Hammers” here → https://pbd.pub/hammers




  One way to understand this is to think of a spectrum where on the far left is
  a physical hammer. This is an example of a simple product, the hammer—a
  tool that a customer might purchase to get a job done (for example, hang
  pictures on the wall by nailing in picture nails). This end of the spectrum is
  “product.” On the other end, we have services. This might be a person who
  you hire to come hammer nails for you, or it might be a service that helps
  create photo prints based on your favorite family moments and delivers
  these custom prints to your home in ready-made kits to hang on the wall.


                                                                                                                 The format of a blueprint   45
                           The experience lifecycle
                           The main difference between a service and a product is that a service
                           provides and performs for the customer, not just an “object” that is
                           acquired. This also means that the service provider is taking on a great
                           deal more risk, ownership, and responsibility, which requires the orga-
                           nizational systems and business plans to be able to maintain those
                           commitments.

                           There’s no “buyer beware” when it comes to services because, often,
                           it’s a sale you have to re-win every single month. Gone are the days of
                           limited warranties and expiration periods. If you’re offering a service, you
                           only get paid when you deliver again, and again, and again… and again…
                           Because of this, services inherently have a relationship with the customer
                           over time.

                           A product also has a time-based experience for the person purchasing and
                           using it, though many services establish ongoing or longer-term relation-
                           ships with the customer (examples: utilities like your cell phone contract,
                           or subscription software licensing and support model, or healthcare). Both
                           services and products consistently follow the lifecycle.

                           Phases of the Experience Lifecycle

                           •	 Unaware: Before the customer even knows about the service or product

                           •	 Aware: The customer learns about it

                           •	 Assess: The customer is interested, and considering it

                           •	 Buy (or Contract/Sign up): The customer signs up, purchases, or
                              contracts to receive the service or product

                           •	 Receive: The customer has the product or service “in hand”—often this
                              includes initial onboarding or packaging

                           •	 Early Use: The customer is setting up and using it for the first time (think
                              “first-time use”)

                           •	 Normal Use: The customer is a regular, more experienced user of the
                              service or product, and this is their normal experience of it working well




46   Your Guide to Blueprinting the Practical Way
The format of a blueprint   47
                           •	 Change (more applicable to services): During normal use, the service
                              changes (e.g. “new feature launched!” or “major upgrade”) and it impacts
                              the customer (what is the experience around this change?)

                           •	 Incident: During normal use, the customer experiences a failure (e.g. an
                              outage, a botched delivery, a broken part) and it impacts the customer
                              (what is the experience around this incident?)

                           •	 Reconsider: The customer reconsiders their “contract” or purchase, and
                              thinks about leaving or no longer using their product

                           •	 Leave (or Stop): The customer leaves the service or stops using the
                              product (and disposes of it) (what is their lasting impression?)

                                                           Because people experience the purchasing

Use the experience lifecycle to                            and use lifecycle of a product similarly to the
                                                           way they experience the purchasing and use
discuss where to zoom in and
                                                           of a service, you can refer to the experience
what scenario to blueprint.                                lifecycle to narrow in on phases that you
                                                           want to blueprint.

                           You might want to focus in on the onboarding phase or early use phase of
                           your service or product (yes, a product also has onboarding and first-time
                           use, for example: imagine purchasing a new appliance or a piece of furni-
                           ture—the “onboarding and early use” phase would include the unboxing,
                           assembly instructions or manual, first-time use, what if something is broken
                           and needs customer support, etc.). Or perhaps you want to focus on the
                           customer support phase when a customer has an issue or a question.
                           The experience lifecycle can be a great tool to discuss and narrow in on
                           specific scenarios you want to explore in blueprinting.

                           While there is much debate in the design world about products vs.
                           services, the reality is that people experience both similarly through time,
                           and we can look at a time-based, linear scenario for purchasing regardless
                           of whether it’s a product sitting on a shelf that someone purchases or a
                           service being provided once or repeatedly over a longer time period.

                           Because of this, we do not believe blueprinting needs to be limited to
                           service experiences, and this is the main driver for why we prefer to use
                           “experience blueprint” instead of “service blueprint.”



48   Your Guide to Blueprinting the Practical Way
         Example scenarios broken into phases
         Let’s return to our shoe company example and break some of these
         scenarios down into phases. You’ll notice that there are many overlap-
         ping high level phases across these scenarios, but several that are unique
         to the scenario. By looking at it this way, you can explore which scenarios
         (and which parts of which scenarios) you want to plan to blueprint, and you
         can start to think of which teams to bring in to speak to different compo-
         nents of the scenario.


Example scenario 1: Purchase shoes in the physical store

Discover the store    Finding options        Compare and select           Purchase             Fulfillment           Wears the shoe         Discards the shoe

                                                                                                                                 Wearing the shoe is not an
               These phases are unique to this scenario as it's a physical store vs. digital
                                                                                                                                 experience you directly deliver,
                                                                                                                                 so you may choose not to
Example scenario 2: Purchase through browsing the catalog                                                                        blueprint it


Discover the store    Finding options         Compare and select        Purchase           Fulfillment & Delivery     Wears the shoe        Discards the shoe


       This might be your primary scenario for digital purchasing, so look at it end-to-end
                                                                                                                           If your company offered a
                                                                                                                             shoe recycling program,
                                                                                                                              you might blueprint that

Example scenario 3: Purchase through shoe-picker interactive tool

Discovers the app           Customize shoe               Purchase                    Fulfillment & Delivery         Wears the shoe         Discards the shoe


                                          This is a unique way to make a custom shoe, so                      Customized shoe
                                           these phases will be different in this scenario                    fulfillment is unique



Example scenario 4: Purchase through conversation with chat representative

Discovers the store    Finding options       Compare and select        Purchase          Fulfillment & Delivery      Wears the shoe         Discards the shoe
                                                                      These phases are covered in scenario 2
                           This is the only unique part of this
                              scenario, as it relies on chat



Example scenario 5: Purchase through monthly shoe styling subscription service

Discover the      Complete sign      First           Fulfillment &         Compare and             Return      Wears the        Discards the       Leaves the
service           up                 ShoeStyle       Delivery              purchase                shoes       shoe             shoe               service


    This is an almost completely different service, even though it may rely on similar shoe inventory                        You might want to
                                                                                                                     blueprint this phase of the
                                                                                                                            service experience




                                                                                                                          The format of a blueprint             49
                           Steps of the scenario
                           In order to effectively blueprint, we have to break the scenario down into
                           more concrete, detailed steps (remember back to being concrete and
                           specific with your scenario? This is where that happens!)

                                                    Once you identify your scenario and who needs to
                                                    be in the session, you will want to work with your
Work with subject matter
                                                    subject matter experts ahead of time to break your
experts to break down                               scenario down into steps. This is important prep work
each scenario into steps                            to do before blueprinting.
before you blueprint!
                                                    When breaking down your scenarios into steps, think
                                                    about the specific actions that are happening in what
                           order, kind of like theater and blocking a play: where are actors entering,
                           when do props and sets change and who does what?


                           Level of detail in your steps
                           Blueprinting is most effective at a certain level of zoom—the steps need
                           to be at the level of the key action. If you are too zoomed out (looking
                           very high level), you will be covering way too much into each step and not
                           benefiting from the process. Your steps will feel bloated and confusing. If
                           you zoom in too much, you get too much repetition step-to-step and it will
                           feel tedious and redundant. There is a “Goldilocks” sweet spot level of
                           detail in your steps that will feel “just right.”

                           Make sure your steps are at the right level of granularity. For example, a
                           step that is too big is, “customer goes to the website and finds what they
                           are looking for.” That is way too vague and encompasses too many actions
                           on the part of the customer or the system/backstage. Now, a step that is
                           too detailed might be, “customer clicks on this button” (unless that button
                           triggers a lot of stuff going on behind the scenes!).

                           Your steps should be more like actions, for example, “customer uses
                           search to find an article.” The next step would be, “customer browses
                           search results, and clicks to an article.” These are the right level of gran-
                           ularity where they are capturing the primary actions happening in the
                           scenario.


50   Your Guide to Blueprinting the Practical Way
Step detail… like Goldilocks, we want the level of detail to be just right!

Too detailed:                               Just right                               Too broad

•	 Customer clicks on Shoe A                •	 Customer browses product              •	 Customer visits website

•	 Customer reviews Shoe A product            catalog to find category page          •	 Customer purchases shoes
  details                                   •	 Customer browses shoes                •	 Customer receives shoes
•	 Customer Clicks on menu to go to         •	 Customer selects shoes to
  full catalog                                compare

•	 Customer clicks on Shoe B                •	 Customer compares shoes

•	 Customer clicks “compare shoes”          •	 Customer selects one and and

•	 Customer selects shoes to                  adds to cart

  compare                                   •	 Customer clicks checkout

•	 Customer reads comparison data           •	 Customer completes purchase

•	 Customer clicks on Shoe A                •	 Customer gets email receipt

•	 … you get the idea                       •	 Fulfillment processes the order for
                                              shipment




            How many steps should you have?
            A good scenario has about 15-20 steps. If you are getting too big, break
            it into phases and tackle each separately. If you don’t have enough, you
            might not be thinking wide enough about the start and end points of your
            scenario. In this case, go back to the experience lifecycle to see where you
            can expand the bounds of your scenario.


            Visible and hidden steps
            A step can be visible to the customer (a step that the customer sees or
            does something) or hidden (backstage to the business behind the scenes).
            We can indicate these by light and dark steps. This lets us illustrate the
            linear left to right of the experience and how it’s delivered.




                                                                                          The format of a blueprint   51
                       Visible steps                                                       Hidden steps




                                                    The Scenario

                           This is where we start to see the difference between a blueprint and a
                           journey map. A blueprint will not only include the customer-facing steps but
                           also the critical backstage steps in linear order. Together, these make up
                           the full picture of the end-to-end scenario and all the dependencies on the
                           backstage.


                           How to handle branching and variations
                           In blueprinting, we go left-to-right in a straight path through a chosen
                           scenario. We understand that the reality of an experience or delivery likely
                           will have branching points (points where for a particular experience path,
                           some customers may branch off and have different experiences) or true
                           variations (where each experience path doesn’t really share the same
                           experience as the other).

                           This is completely typical to have complexity in the variety of scenarios for
                           your service or offering. However, to benefit most from blueprinting (and
                           not spend forever looking at every single possible scenario), you really
                           should pick a smaller set of key scenarios as a “lens” through which to view
                           the delivery. You want just enough coverage in the scenarios you pick in
                           order to “peek” into the different aspects of how the organization delivers,
                           and you actually don’t need to cover every single possible path.

                           To handle branching, ask yourself whether a particular branch of the
                           scenario is important to include in your key scenarios. If it is, just map the
                           parts of the path that are different in a separate blueprint.




52   Your Guide to Blueprinting the Practical Way
Branching                                                                                    The Scenario
                                                      5

 1             2                                                              1             2          3          4         5

                             3               4




Variations
                                        4a

 1             2        3                         6
                                                                                                           The Scenario
                                                                                  Primary path

         Variations     Different in the middle
         of the first   – pick the primary path
                                                      Ends in the                    1           2          3         4b          5                 6
                                                      same place
         phase

                            4b         5                                                                                   Variation
                                                                                                                      4a   You can just blueprint
                                                                                                                           the couple steps that
                                                                                                                           are different as an
                                                  6                                                                        alternate scenario




           Similarly, if a true variation is important enough to blueprint as its own
           scenario, just spin up another blueprint to map it as a new scenario. You
           may even be able to copy over or reference some of the same steps from
           the other blueprint, or indicate where they share steps.



  Scenario A
     Phase 1                      Phase 2                           Phase 3                          Phase 4



  Scenario B                                                            Phase 3b                       Phase 4b
  Cover just the unique phases, and note that this
  scenario picks up after Phase 2 of Scenario A



           We are not trying to create a process map. That is not the point of blue-
           printing (to map every possible branch and variation in a single diagram).
  Scenario
     Instead, A
              we are focusing on the high impact scenarios as a way to get
           good coverage of the essential aspects of the backstageAlternatively,
                                                                   delivery soif that
                                                                                 only a
           we can improve the experience.                                                    few steps overlap
                                                                                             between two scenarios,
                                                                                             you can color code or
                                                                                             indicate that they are
                                                                                             "shared" steps between
                                                                                                                  The format of a blueprint             53
                                                                                             multiple scenarios.

  Scenario B
                             Scenario A
                                                                                                         Alternatively, if only a
                                                                                                         few steps overlap
                                                                                                         between two scenarios,
                                                                                                         you can color code or
                                                                                                         indicate that they are
                                                                                                         "shared" steps between
                                                                                                         multiple scenarios.

                             Scenario B




                                What to do with concurrent steps
                                We acknowledge that in reality, there are often concurrent “hidden” steps
                                in the backstage that are automated or happening while a customer is
                                doing something. For the sake of the practicality of facilitating the session,
                                we can flatten these concurrent steps into one linear line.


                                     3, 4, 5, and 6 are concurrent steps which we can stretch
                                     out linearly for the sake of the blueprinting exercise

             Visible
                               3         6
                                                                                                The Scenario

     1            2            4                         7                   1       2          3    4          5       6           7


                               5
         Hidden




                                Do your best to keep steps together or near each other if they are concur-
                                rent and you can make a note above the steps to indicate they happen
                                concurrently. Listing them left-to-right linearly will not cause any issues or
                                impact the effectiveness of your blueprinting. In fact, it makes it easier to
                                tease apart what often feels like a messy, tangled process.

                                This is something that distinguishes our practical approach from tradi-
                                tional service blueprinting (which attempts to map arrows, directionality,
                                and swimlanes all at once), when in a real-life session, it is so much easier
                                to walk through the scenario step-by-step, left-to-right, and discuss each in
                                turn.


54        Your Guide to Blueprinting the Practical Way
Example step breakdowns
Let’s go back to our shoe company scenarios to see examples of how
we might break each scenario down into steps. In the example scenarios
on the next page, you can see how they overlap and share some steps,
but not all. Where you see significant differences are good candidates to
create multiple blueprints of difference scenarios in order to get full under-
standing of the backstage.

See “Examples Scenarios” 2-page spread on the next page.




                                                                             The format of a blueprint   55
Example Scenarios                                             Spanning the product service landscape


Example scenario 1: Purchase                  Example scenario 2: Purchase              Example scenario 3: Purchase
shoes in the physical store                   shoes online through browsing             through shoe-picker interactive
                                              the catalog                               tool in app

PHASE: Finding options                        PHASE: Finding options                    PHASE: Discovers the app


 1   Customer enters the store                 1    Customer sees an ad and clicks to    1   Customer sees an ad and clicks to
                                                    our website                               interactive shoe maker app
 2   Customer browses the aisles
                                               2    Customer browses product catalog     2   Customer learns about the app
     Customer engages a service rep to              to find category page                    Customer downloads the app from
 3                                                                                       3
     assist in getting shoes to try on         3    Customer browses shoes                   the app store
 4   Customer indicates which shoe styles                                                4   Customer opens the app
     they want, and their shoe size
                                              PHASE: Compare and select                      Customer goes through onboarding
     Rep goes into back to get shoes to                                                  5
 5                                                                                           screens and instructions
     try on
                                               4    Customer selects shoes to compare
 6   Rep delivers the shoes to the
                                                                                        PHASE: Customize shoe
     customer to try on                        5    Customer compares shoes

                                                                                         6   Customer starts the shoe builder and
PHASE: Compare and select                                                                    selects a base shoe style
                                              PHASE: Purchase
                                                                                         7   Customer customizes their shoe
 7   Customer tries on shoes                                                                 (colors, flair, laces)
                                               6    Customer selects one and and
     Customer makes a decision about                adds to cart                         8   Customer previews their shoe
 8   a shoe
                                               7    Customer clicks checkout

                                               8    Customer completes purchase         PHASE: Purchase
PHASE: Purchase
                                               9    Customer gets email receipt          9   Customer adds shoes to their cart
 9   Customer takes shoes up to the
     checkout                                                                           10   Customer clicks checkout
     Cashier completes purchase and           PHASE: Fulfillment & Delivery
10                                                                                      11   Customer completes purchase
     provides receipt
                                               10   Fulfillment processes the order     12   Customer gets email receipt
                                                    for shipment
PHASE: Fulfillment
                                               11   Picked up by mail carrier
                                                                                        PHASE: Fulfillment & Delivery
11   Customer takes shoes up to the            12   Tracking notification to customer
     checkout                                                                                Fulfillment processes the order for on-
                                                                                        13
                                               13   Delivery to customer                     demand shoe making

                                               14   Customer opens their shoes and      14   Factory builds custom shoes
                                                    tries them on
                                                                                        15   Factory hands order to processing

                                                                                        16   Picked up by mail carrier

                                                                                        17   Tracking notification to customer

                                                                                        18   Delivery to customer

                                                                                        19   Customer opens their shoes and tries
 #   Hidden step (backstage)                                                                 them on

 #   Visible step (frontstage)                                                          20   Customer shares picture of their shoe
                                                                                             in the app




56       Your Guide to Blueprinting the Practical Way
          What do these scenarios and steps have in common? What is unique? 


Example scenario 4: Purchase                   Example scenario 5: Use the ShoeStyler subscription service to
shoes through conversation with                purchase shoes regularly
chat representative

PHASE: Finding options                         PHASE: Discover the service

                                                1    Customer sees an ad (or friend refers them) and visits website for ShoeStyler
 1    Customer sees an ad and clicks to our
      website                                   2    Customer learns more about ShoeStyler service
 2    Customer sees popup prompting
                                                3    Customer decides they want to try it, and signs up
      them to get personalized help via chat
      to pick a shoe
                                               PHASE: Complete sign up
 3    Customer opens the chat and
      responds to the prompt “what are you      4    Customer enters their payment and shipping information, shoe size
      looking for?”
                                                5    Customer shares their preferences for shoes
 4    Chat representative is assigned to the
      chat                                      6    Customer completes setup and is given info for what will happen next

 5    Chat representative responds to           7    Style profiles is created for customer in database
      customer and asks more questions
                                                8    Stylist is matched with customer
      Chat rep makes recommendations for
 6
      shoes the customer will like
                                               PHASE: First ShoeStyle
PHASE: Compare and select                       9    Stylist reviews customer preferences

                                                10   Stylist selects shoe options to send to customer
 7    Customer clicks on one or more of the
      recommended shoes                         11   Stylist completes the order preparation and submits order
 8    Customer compares shoes
                                                12   Stylist messages customer a personalized note

PHASE: Purchase                                PHASE: Fulfillment & Delivery

      Customer selects one and and              13   Fulfillment processes the order for shipment
 9
      adds to cart                              14   Picked up by mail carrier
10    Customer clicks checkout
                                                15   Tracking notification to customer
11    Customer completes purchase
                                                16   Delivery to customer
12    Customer gets email receipt
                                               PHASE: Compare and purchase

PHASE: Fulfillment & Delivery                   17   Customer opens their shoes and tries them on

                                                18   Customer follows instructions for how to complete the purchase for their
13    Fulfillment processes the order                shoes using the ShoeStyler site
      for shipment                              19   Customer receives email receipt for purchase
14    Picked up by mail carrier
                                               PHASE: Return shoes they didn't pick
15    Tracking notification to customer
                                                20 Customer packages up shoes they want to return
16    Delivery to customer
                                                21   Customer takes package to drop location
 17   Customer opens their shoes and
      tries them on                             22 Return received and processed
                                                23 Customer receives confirmation of return



                                                                                                The format of a blueprint       57
                           Layers of the blueprint
                           The layers of the blueprint are what let us look through the lens of the
                           customer experience into the business and how it operates and delivers
                           the experience. This is where the magic happens!

                                                       It is best to think of the layers like a checklist that
The layers of a blueprint                              enables your cross-functional team to have the
are a checklist to enable                              right conversation. They prompt the group to think
the right conversation                                 about the various different components of how
                                                       the experience is delivered, and help you not miss
with your team.
                                                       something that might be easy to overlook.

                           By going deep into each step in the scenario, you can expose the breadth
                           and depth of the business that supports and produces the stage where
                           the journey takes place. This process relies on a cross-functional collabo-
                           ration between different parts of the organization, in order to represent all
                           aspects of the internal operations.


                           Common layers to both current and future state
                           blueprinting
                           When you think of how an organization sets the stage for delivering an
                           experience, you need to consider the following core components of expe-
                           rience delivery:



                                              •	 Touchpoints—interaction points between the customer and business

                                              •	 Roles—that staff are playing to deliver the experience

                                              •	 Technology—technical systems and tools used

                                              •	 Policies—rules or guidelines that impact the experience

                                              •	 Processes—support processes that the business follows




58   Your Guide to Blueprinting the Practical Way
As we translate these components to the layers of the blueprint format,
we organize them underneath each step of the scenario. Not every layer
needs to be present in each step, and some layers may have more than
one item in a step. In this way, as you add layers to the blueprint, it creates
a heat map of sorts that lets you see where the complexity lies.

                                                                           




                                                                       Heatmap reveals which
                                                                       steps are more complex




                                                                              The format of a blueprint   59
                               The complete anatomy of a blueprint
                               Now you have a foundational understanding of all the aspects of a current-
                               state and future-state blueprint: the scenario, phases, steps, and layers that
                               help you generate actionable insights and designs that lead to great expe-
                               riences and efficient backstage operations.

                Current State Blueprint Template                                                           The Scenario

                 Legend               Offering name: replace this with the name of your offering                   Phases
                                      Scenario name: replace this with a name for your scenario
                  Phase
                                      Phase                           Phase
                  Step                                                                                                    Steps
                                       1        2       3       4       5       6       7          8   9
                  (visible)

                  Step 
                  (hidden)

                  Touchpoint                                                                                              Layers
                  Roles

                  Process

                  Technology

                  Policy

                  Critical
                  Moments

                  Opportunities

                  Metrics

                  Questions

                  Notes




                Future State Blueprint Template                                                            The Scenario

                                      Offering name: replace this with the name of your offering
                 Legend                                                                                            Phases
                                      Scenario name: replace this with a name for your scenario
                  Phase
                                      Phase                           Phase
                  Step                                                                                                    Steps
                  (visible)            1       2        3       4       5       6       7          8   9

                  Step 
                  (hidden)

                  Touchpoint                                                                                              Layers
                  Roles

                  Process

                  Technology

                  Policy

                  Potential
                  pitfalls

                  Rationale

                  Questions

                  Notes




60   Your Guide to Blueprinting the Practical Way
                 Core layers of an
               experience blueprint
         LAYER                   DEFINITION                                      EXAMPLES

Common layers to both current and future-state

         Step definition         Define what is happening in that step           Customer completes purchase, Fulfillment
                                 (hidden or visible to the customer)             processes the order


         Touchpoints             A point of interaction between the              Webpage, app, storefront, touchpad, letter,
                                 customer and the business                       phone call


         Roles                   The roles of people involved in service         Operations manager, Cashier, Fulfillment,
                                 delivery (staff or 3rd party)                   Customer support


         Technology              Technology systems or infrastructure used       Inventory database, Point of Sale system,
                                 in the step                                     Email campaign platform


         Policies                Rules or guidelines of the organization that    Free shipping only within country,
                                 are in play in the step                         Customers must verify email, Orders only
                                                                                 processed M-F

         Processes               Support processes that enable the step to       Inventory management, Monthly marketing
                                 happen                                          campaign, Product enhancement cycle


         Questions               Questions or unknowns that you have             How are new shoe styles selected? Who is
                                 about the step that need follow up              in charge of running reports? What is our
                                                                                 policy on returns?
                                 Any additional info or context from the         Greg from sales has a dashboard he
         Notes                   discussion that doesn’t fit in other layers     updates regularly showing shoe sales that
                                                                                 might help us with this step.

Current-state layers

         Metrics                 Data or analytics insights that pertain to      60% of customers are browsing for
                                 this step                                       women’s shoes, Average fulfillment time is
                                                                                 32 hours

         Critical                What can go wrong in this step? Sources of      Website loses items in cart (bug), Customers
                                 pain—experience or operational                  abandon purchase, Fulfillment loses order,
         Moments
                                 breakdown (potential or actual)                 Shipping delays

         Opportunities           Ideas, “ah-ha” realizations, or opportunities   Provide a “don’t forget your cart” email, Use
                                 to improve or fix this step                     cookies to remind customer what they
                                                                                 browsed last time, Track data on lost orders

Future-state layers

         Rationale               Known facts, metrics, or insights that          Since majority of customers are female,
                                 influence the design of this step               feature women’s shoes in banner first.


         Potential               What will break the experience at this          No shoes fit right and customer has to
                                 step? Anticipate and plan for problems          return all shoes
         Pitfalls


                       Get digital, sharable, and printable copies of all reference pages at pbd.pub/posters
Interlude


Example
Blueprints
The format of the Practical Experience Blueprint has evolved over the
years, from our early prototypes of butcher paper and sticky notes, to our
modern version available in digital whiteboarding tools.

At its core, however, it’s still the same ultra-useful combination of work-
shop, artifact, and actionable insights. Here are a few examples of different
ways we, you, and people we’ve never even met have adapted and used
the format to solve their customer experience problems in ways that fit
their team’s needs!




                                                                                63
64   Your Guide to Practical Experience Blueprinting - Flowers, Miller
Example Blueprints   65
Legend
                                                                    Stopping bank robbery
                 Step definition

                                                                    StealthMan picks up robbery on his police scanner and moves to stop it.
                 Hidden step definition



                 Touchpoint                                                    1                           2                      3                          4                            5                         6                             7                         8                               9                          10                           11                          12                        13                   14                           15                        16                     17
                                                                      Learns about robbery                                                                                                                   Mobilizes suit and vehicle                                                                                                                                                  Stops the bad guys


                 Actor                                                                          StealthMan receives       StealthMan locates             StealthMan
                                                                                                                                                                                  StealthCave system                                                                                                  StealthMobile           StealthMobile notifies                                      StealthMan uses
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  SuperSuit activates     StealthMan enters                                      StealthMan          Police process bad
                                                                     StealthCave scanner                                                                                             boots up and           StealthMan gets into        StealthMan gathers           StealthMan get in              geotracking and            butler and tech with        StealthMan drives to          scanner to assess                                                           StealthMan ties up
                                                                                                     signal from          scene of crime on            descends to his                                                                                                                                                       tracking, and activates                                                                recommended           building and fights                               transports bad guys      guys and lock them
                                                                        scans for crime                                                                                            prepares suit and              SuperSuit                 equipment                his StealthMobile              targeting system                                        scene of the crime           where criminals are                                                             bad guys
                                                                                                StealthCave scanner        his StealthWatch             StealthCave                                                                                                                                                            “Crime in progress”                                                                    equipment             the bad guys                                      to police station              up
                                                                                                                                                                                         vehicle                                                                                                        boots up                                                                         and their weapons
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      status


                 System
                                                                                                                                                                                                                StealthCave                 StealthCave                                                                                                                                                                                   StealthMan's fists on
                                                                     StealthCave Scanner               StealthWatch          StealthWatch              StealthElevator               StealthCave                                                                       StealthMobile                 StealthMobile              Mobile phones                  StealthMobile                StealthWatch                 SuperSuit                                      StealthRope            StealthMobile         Police station cells
                                                                                                                                                                                                             SuperSuit chamber             equipment wall                                                                                                                                                                                   bad guy's faces



                 Policy                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (stun ray, zip line,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      StealthComputer        Suit (armor),
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             boomerang,
                                                                       Police dispatcher               StealthMan             StealthMan                 StealthMan                   StealthMan                 StealthMan                  StealthCuffs,              StealthMan                  StealthComputer                  Butler                     StealthMan                   StealthMan               weapon selection        equipment                StealthMobile            StealthMan                  Police
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         StealthSpray, smoke                                                                                                                                                               system          (weapons/tactics)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             bombs, nets)


                 Observation / Fact
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     StealthMobile                                             StealthMobile
                                                                       PowerScan5000               PowerScan5000           StealthComputer            StealthComputer              StealthComputer            SuperSuit system               StealthMan               StealthComputer                                            Tech Genius                                            PowerScanner5000              SuperSuit system        StealthMan                StealthMan               Bad Guys                 Bad Guys
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        system                                                    system



                 Metric / Data                                                                                                                        StealthMan has 7                                                                                                                            StealthComputer
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Scanner shows where       Only some equipment
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         bodies and highlights
                                                                                                                                                     minute SLA to reach                                                                  StealthComputer              StealthMobile            tracking system links                                                                                             needs to be activated                                                                               Police computer
                                                                        Police dispatch              Police dispatch         Google Maps                                           SuperSuit system            Suit weighs 11lb                                                                                                StealthComputer                 Google Maps              and identifies weapons                                 Bad Guys                  Bad Guys              Google Maps
                                                                                                                                                      the bottom of the                                                                   inventory system                system               StealthMobile location
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          based on weapon
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  to be made ready for                                                                                     system
                                                                                                                                                       StealthElevator                                                                                                                              with computer                                                                                                         use
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               signature


                 Question / Unknown                                                                                         StealthMan has a          StealthElevator is a                                                               StealthMan "checks
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           All traffic laws apply
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           In-visor display                                                          StealthMan ties up                                 Capturing and
                                                                       Technically, this is       StealthComputer            rule that he only       hidden door behind a           StealthMobile             Getting suited up              out" items by                                                                      StealthMobile                                                shows list of                                 SuperSuit combat         bad guys and carries      StealthMobile          fighting criminals as
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Google Maps                                                                          to StealthMan and
                                                                           not legal            signals StealthWatch       fights crime within      piano that reveals itself          system                    takes 1:49              removing them from                                                                        system                                                    weapons the                                   defense systems            them to back of       onboard computer            a superhero is
                                                                                                                                                      with dramatic music                                                                 the equipment wall
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             must be obeyed                                                                                            StealthMobile
                                                                                                                               the city limits                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              criminals have                                                                                                              against the law


                 Critical Moment                                     Text analysis algorithms
                                                                                                In-ear headphones alert    What if there is no                                    StealthSuit has to be         Suit zipper
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Technology Genius
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Sometimes                   StealthMan uses
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         In-visor display shows
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Police typically make
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         designs new gear every
                                                                                                    StealthMan of the                                StealthElevator ride           prepared into it's                                                                StealthMobile has                                                                      google maps on his                                                                                      Are the bad guys                                 note that bad guys
                                                                       analyze dispatch for
                                                                                                 dispatch, and play the
                                                                                                                          location identified in                                                             sometimes catches          two weeks and educates                                                                notificaitions don't                                        list of recommended                              SuperSuit system                                 PowerScanner5000
                                                                     keywords like "robbery"                                                          takes 8 seconds             mechanized chamber
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           StealthMan at a bi-      top speed of 150mph                                                                     phone to drive to the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         tactics and equipment                                                          conscious?                                   were delivered by a
                                                                                                    audio source file        the dispatch?                                           after each use             in the back                                                                                                     come through                 scene of the crime                                                                                                                                            vigilante
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             weekly briefing


                 Idea / Opportunity                                                             What is the range on
                                                                                                                             Sometimes the
                                                                                                                                                                                  StealthMobile turns
                                                                                                                                                                                                             Suit is a tight fit and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Why isn't equipment           StealthMobile is                                                                                                    How does the                                    Violence in public is     Sometimes his knot-        Last quarter,          StealthMan is still
                                                                     53% accuracy of text                                 location is wrong, or      Why is the elevator                                      eating too much                                                                                                                               15% of drives incur
                                                                                                 the StealthWatch                                                                on and seat warmers                                    included in the suit         bright red and has                                                                                                 scanner know what                                  against the law, as       work is not super      StealthMan delivers         technically a
                                                                          analysis                                         the criminals have         behind a piano?                                               makes it                                                                                                                                    accidents
                                                                                                     receiver?                                                                          turn on                                              chamber?                      flames                                                                                                       weapons there are?                                are many weapons                 great               23 criminals           vigilante criminal
                                                                                                                                 moved                                                                         uncomfortable


                                                                                                StealthMan might not                                                             StealthCave Dashboard        Suit gets cleaned                                                                                                                                                           What happens if
                                                                                                                          StealthWatch battery                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Driving to police
                                                                       Scanner receives                                                             Elevator has multiple          display turns on and                                   Equipment is not            StealthMobile is                                                                                                                                                    Typically this fight is   Ditch the rope, use a
Phase timeline indicator                                               roughly 72 calls a
                                                                                                     be wearing
                                                                                                  StealthWatch (it is
                                                                                                                           only lasts around 6
                                                                                                                          hours before needing
                                                                                                                                                     floor buttons, don't          loads location of the
                                                                                                                                                                                                             once a week and is
                                                                                                                                                                                                             unavailble when at
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           included in suit          bright red and has
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Often has to re-route
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               due to traffic
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         weapons are made
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            of different
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          with fists, guns, and          more fancy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            station makes it easy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             for police to try and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Pay off or fund the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     police department?
                                                                             day                                                                    push the wrong one              crime and dispatch                                        chamber                      flames                                                                                                                                                                 knives            containment system
                                                                                                   not waterproof)               charged                                                                        the cleaners                                                                                                                                                                materials?                                                                                        catch StealthMan
                                                                                                                                                                                          details
  This is a summary of the steps beneath this box.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Car is way too             Often scanner is
                                                                     Text analysis is often     Use an Apple watch        Google maps is slow                                                                                                                                                                                                                noticeable and he                                                             Most often bank                                  Leaving bad guys at          Work out an
                                                                                                                                                        Just 1 button -                                      Multiple SuperSuits        Picking the items is a      StealthMobile could                                                                                                 inaccurate or doesn't
                                                                         inaccurate and            and make a                to load in the                                                                                                                                                                                                                sometimes gets pulled                                                          robberies have 3-5                                 a secured location       arrangement with
                                                                                                                                                         StealthCave                                              available                 waste of time                 be black                                                                          over by the cops for
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           pick up smaller
                                                                     triggers false alarms          StealthApp                StealthCave                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     bad guys                                      and notifying police          the police
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  speeding                    weapons


                                                                      If we get caught, we                                Use an Apple watch                                                                                             Often inventory is                                                                                                                              Use visual camera                                StealthMan succeeds
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Adjustable suit                                                                                                                              Use more reliable
                                                                       could go to jail, this                                and make a                                                                                                    out of date or                                                                                                                                 and drone to do                                 and captures all bad
                                                                                                                                                                                                                waistbands                                                                                                                                  directions system                                                             guys 68% of the time
                                                                             is illegal                                       StealthApp                                                                                                    inaccurate                                                                                                                                     recon instead?



                                                                        Upgrade speech                                                                                                                                                   Equipment loadout
                                                                                                                           Use better location                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            How many bad guys
                                                                       analyzer for better                                                                                                                   Velcro not zippers         templates based on                                                                                                   Paint car all black
                                                                                                                          and mapping system                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  get away?
                                                                           accuracy                                                                                                                                                          crime type


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Equipment should be
                                                                      Work in partnership                                                                                                                                                 attached to suit in                                                                                               Only fight crime at                                                           StealthMan can get
                                                                       with the police                                                                                                                                                   the suit chamber by                                                                                                      night?                                                                         hurt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                default



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Improve StealthSuit
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               defense




                                                     Questions
                                                     What is the range on
                                                                               Why is the elevator
                                                      the StealthWatch
                                                                                behind a piano?
                                                          receiver?
                                                                                                                                                   Accurate data                                                                                                                                                     Collaboration / Cooperation
                                                                                What happens if
                                                       How does the                                                                                Text analysis is often         Upgrade speech            Often inventory is              Sometimes               Use visual camera                                  If we get caught, we               Work out an
                                                                               weapons are made                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Pay off or fund the
                                                     scanner know what                                                                                 inaccurate and            analyzer for better          out of date or            notificaitions don't         and drone to do                                    could go to jail, this         arrangement with
                                                                                  of different                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      police department?
                                                     weapons there are?                                                                            triggers false alarms             accuracy                  inaccurate                 come through                recon instead?                                          is illegal                   the police
                                                                                  materials?


                                                                                                                                                      Sometimes the                                                                      Often scanner is
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Leaving bad guys at
                                                     How many bad guys          Are the bad guys                                                   location is wrong, or        Often has to re-route       Use more reliable          inaccurate or doesn't                                                                                           Work in partnership          Police could signal
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        a secured location
                                                         get away?                 conscious?                                                       the criminals have              due to traffic          directions system             pick up smaller                                                                                               with the police             StealthMan? (pager)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       and notifying police
                                                                                                                                                          moved                                                                              weapons


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Driving to police
                                                     Why isn't equipment       What if there is no
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        station makes it easy
                                                     included in the suit     location identified in                                               Rebrand --> ?                                                                             Technology                                                                  for police to try and
                                                          chamber?               the dispatch?                                                                                                                                                                                                                            catch StealthMan
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Car is way too                 StealthMan might not
                                                                                                                                                                                 Not what the city           noticeable and he                                            Use an Apple watch
                                                                                                                                                    StealthMobile could                                                                            be wearing
                                                                                                                                                                                wants, but what the        sometimes gets pulled                                             and make a
                                                                                                                                                          be black                                          over by the cops for
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                StealthWatch (it is
                                                                                                                                                                                    city needs                                                                                StealthApp
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  speeding                       not waterproof)


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               StealthWatch battery
                                                                                                                                                                                  StealthMobile is
                                                                                                                                                                                                            Only fight crime at                 only lasts around 6       Use better location
                                                                                                                                                     Paint car all black         bright red and has
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  night?                       hours before needing      and mapping system
                                                                                                                                                                                       flames                                                         charged



                                                                                                                                                     StealthMan is still                                                                       Use an Apple watch
                                                                                                                                                       technically a                                                                              and make a
                                                                                                                                                     vigilante criminal                                                                            StealthApp




                                                                                                                                                   Simplify / Efficiency                                                                     Equipment
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Suit is a tight fit and                                                                  Suit gets cleaned
                                                                                                                                                   Elevator has multiple                                    Equipment loadout                     Suit zipper
                                                                                                                                                                                   Just 1 button -                                                                         eating too much              Improve StealthSuit          StealthMan can get           once a week and is            Multiple SuperSuits
                                                                                                                                                    floor buttons, don't                                   templates based on                  sometimes catches
                                                                                                                                                                                    StealthCave                                                                                  makes it                    defense                        hurt                  unavailble when at                 available
                                                                                                                                                   push the wrong one                                           crime type                        in the back
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            uncomfortable                                                                            the cleaners


                                                                                                                                                                                Equipment should be
                                                                                                                                                     Equipment is not                                                                                                    Ditch the rope, use a          Sometimes his knot-
                                                                                                                                                                                  attached to suit in      Picking the items is a                 Adjustable suit
                                                                                                                                                      included in suit                                                                                                        more fancy                 work is not super           Velcro not zippers                Handcuffs
                                                                                                                                                                                 the suit chamber by           waste of time                       waistbands
                                                                                                                                                         chamber                                                                                                         containment system                    great
                                                                                                                                                                                        default




            66                             Your Guide to Practical Experience Blueprinting - Flowers, Miller
Example Blueprints   67
68   Your Guide to Practical Experience Blueprinting - Flowers, Miller
Example Blueprints   69
Chapter Four

The process of
blueprinting
The blueprinting process starts with identifying that blueprinting is the right
approach to your needs, then planning and preparing for a cross-functional
team to come together to do blueprinting, and then synthesis of the output
of the blueprint, resulting in an action plan.

The blueprinting sessions themselves are a group activity, and they need
to be done with a cross-functional team in a workshop setting, using the
blueprint format to unpack the surface-to-core of the business that sets
the stage for the customer experience. This is critical, because no one
person understands all the ins and outs of the business (unless you are a
one-person business!).

In order to lead an effective blueprinting session, you’ll want to prepare
the scenario before the session, and identify the right subject matter
experts from across your organization to join. Blueprinting works when it
is approached practically in the context of your organization. To success-
fully get through your blueprint, you’ll want to do enough preparation in
advance to understand the scope of the session, who to invite, and how
much time you will need.

                                                                                  71
                             High level blueprinting process
                             Regardless of whether you are doing current-state or future-state blue-
                             printing, you will generally follow the same high-level process. Something
                             important to understand is that blueprinting isn’t just a workshop—it is the
                             process of going from an opportunity space to an action plan, and the blue-
                             print itself is a tool that helps you get there. Blueprinting is a journey in and
                             of itself for your organization, and for it to be successful, you’ll want to be
                             thoughtful about how you embark on the journey and who you take.

                             At a high level, the process of blueprinting looks like this:


             1-2 weeks                       1-2 weeks                  1-4 weeks                      1-2 weeks



                 1                              2                           3                               4

                                         Planning and
           Inception                                                  Facilitation             Actionable insights
                                          preparation

     Aligning on the problem to         Defining scenarios,       Facilitating blueprinting     Going from workshop to
        solve, the opportunity        assembling your team,      sessions with your cross-      work, defining a concrete
      space, the future vision       organizing your sessions         functional team         action plan based on insights



                             1) Inception
                             When embarking on a blueprinting exercise in your organization, you need
                             to first align on what problem you are trying to solve. This is your oppor-
                             tunity space—either where you plan to make improvements to what is, or
                             where you are developing a vision for something new. This is the phase
                             where you will want to leverage data, research, and other organizational
                             insights to narrow down and select the key scenarios that will be impactful
                             to blueprint.



72    Your Guide to Blueprinting the Practical Way
You’ll want to articulate these scenarios using an iconic name (e.g. “Help
desk customer support experience”) and a one-sentence summary that
captures the gist of the scenario, for example, “Many customers are having
painful experiences getting resolution to their delivery issues.” A future-
state example might be, “We envision a seamless, fast, and multichannel
help experience for customers dealing with delivery issues.” Think of this
as a problem or opportunity statement that captures the focus of why this
scenario has been selected.

In this phase, you are starting to build buy-in around these scenarios and
engage key subject matter experts (SMEs) to participate in the process.
You are gaining sponsorship from leaders in your organization, and setting
expectations for what the blueprinting process will be like, and what the
organization can expect from it.

Depending on the scope of the opportunity space and how many
scenarios, or how difficult it is to build momentum with your organization,
this step can be as quick as a week or may take several weeks.


2) Planning and preparation
Now that you have buy-in, and have identified the key scenarios you want
to focus on, you can start to block out the top-level throughline of the steps
in each scenario. This can be done with a blend of solo and group work.
This is not the blueprinting session—it is the rough drafting of the steps and
the surface-level validation that the steps and phases are correct. This can
take some time, as it is important for current-state that this is accurate, but it
doesn’t have to be precise.

Do this preparation with one or two of your key SMEs—the scenario
owner, or someone with deep and broad knowledge of the scenario. The
steps will be validated and reviewed in the blueprinting session itself, so it
doesn’t have to be completely perfect in advance, however it is important
to do this before the blueprinting session ahead of time so you can
pre-populate the blueprint and be ready to go.

For future-state, this may be done as a separate future-state experience
mapping workshop to start to storyboard out the desired customer expe-
rience you want to design. Then you can spend some time converting this
vision to steps in the future-state scenario.


                                                                              The process of blueprinting   73
                           3) Facilitation
                           This is where the actual “blueprinting” happens in a group setting. These
                           working sessions are where your cross-functional team that you have
                           assembled goes through and details out all the layers, debates what is
                           happening in each step, and comes away with actionable insights.

                           This is where you facilitate the group through the “checklist” of the layers
                           of the blueprint and guide the conversation to get a comprehensive
                           surface-to-core view underneath the end-to-end of the scenario. You may
                           have multiple work sessions to get through your scenarios, using the blue-
                           printing template to guide the sessions.


                           4) Actionable insights
                           After you have completed blueprinting, the work does not end here. You
                           will pull out the actionable insights from the blueprint to develop a work
                           plan. For improving current-state, you will end up with tactical short-term
                           fixes identified, as well as bigger strategic directions for improving the
                           experience delivery. For future-state, you will end up with a concrete imple-
                           mentation plan to make the vision for the new experience into an organiza-
                           tional reality.

                           Here is where you will want to start sharing out the results of the process,
                           delegating the work to the appropriate teams and stakeholders, and
                           getting sponsorship for the next phase of the work. You may create a more
                           condensed and distilled report to circulate and share broadly across the
                           organization.

                           You may have a screenshot of the blueprint template filled out, however,
                           what you share in this phase is not the blueprint. It is the resulting work
                           plan, strategy, insights, and direction that resulted from the process. The
                           actual blueprint artifact itself is no more relevant than the blueprint when
                           building a house—after you move in, the big roll of paper is just a keepsake
                           with little relevance now that the house is built or renovated.




74   Your Guide to Blueprinting the Practical Way
         Current-state
      blueprinting process
           Follow these six steps to do current-state blueprinting!


1   Choose the scenarios to blueprint
    You choose a collection of important or particularly painful scenario
    experiences to blueprint, and these act as use cases you want to
    understand.


2   Break scenarios down into steps
    Prepare for blueprinting by breaking down each scenario into the linear
    steps of the experience (visible step) and backstage (hidden steps).
    Blueprint your scenarios.


3   Blueprint your scenarios
    Gather your cross-functional team to blueprint the high level end-to-end
    view as well as the detailed surface-to-core view of each scenario and
    surface actionable insights.


4   Collect questions, critical moments, and ideas
    Blueprinting results in a collection of critical moments and ideas that
    capture insights into potential improvements to the service or product
    offering.


5   Pull out actionable insights
    Critical moments are then grouped into strategic themes and tactical fixes
    that apply across scenarios, enabling you to plan longer-term holistic
    improvements.


6   Take action!
    Create an action plan for how to improve the experience delivery, both
    the short term tactical fixes that you can do immediately as well as the
    long term strategy.

          Get digital, sharable, and printable copies of all reference pages at pbd.pub/posters
          Future-state
      blueprinting process
           Follow these six steps to do future-state blueprinting!


1   Understand current state
    Do customer research, market research, or current state blueprinting to
    understand what exists today.



2   Define the desired future state experience
    Map or storyboard the high level new experience that you want to create
    for your customers. Get clear on your value proposition, and the problem
    you are trying to solve.


3   Define the scenarios to blueprint
    Identify the key scenarios you want to blueprint (where the experience
    starts and ends, and how the customer traverses the experience).



4   Blueprint the future state
    Gather a cross-functional team to design how you might deliver the new
    experience as an organization!



5   Harvest your blueprint to create an implementation plan
    Collect the touchpoints, processes, roles, systems, and policies that you
    came up with in blueprinting to develop an implementation plan to realize
    your desired future state.


6   Take action!
    Put your implementation plan into action by assigning owners and
    developing an implementation roadmap.


         Get digital, sharable, and printable copies of all reference pages at pbd.pub/posters
Chapter Five

Planning and
preparation
In order to successfully guide your cross-functional team through a blue-
printing process, you’ll want to ensure that you’ve done the necessary
planning and preparation. This involves clarifying which experiences you
want to blueprint (the specific, concrete scenarios), getting these scenarios
fleshed out enough before the group session, making sure you have the
right people identified to participate, and the logistics of scheduling, note-
taking, and setting up your template.

As the person guiding the team through the blueprinting process, your
job is part facilitator, part project manager, part leader in the way that you
can organize the work and create the space for the right conversation to
happen. We hope to set you up for success in running this process effec-
tively within your organization.


                                                                                 79
             Blueprinting 
            Prep Checklist
  Use this checklist to make sure you’ve done all the necessary
     steps to prepare for a successful blueprinting session.


Identify your scenarios

Map the steps of your scenarios (and document touchpoints)

Determine who should be invited to the session

Get someone to be a notetaker/support facilitator for you

Schedule between 2-6 90-minute sessions on everyone’s
calendars (depends on how many scenarios and whether
current-state or future-state—which takes more time!)

Reserve a room if needed, or set up a video conference link

Set up your blueprinting template and pre-fill it with your
scenario and steps

Plan to introduce your team to blueprinting, the tool you will
be using, and the specific scenarios

Get your senior leaders to show up for the kickoff/wrapup,
endorse the workshop and you, and help promote your
efforts (and remind people to take it seriously!)




    Get digital, sharable, and printable copies of all reference pages at pbd.pub/posters
Selecting your scenarios
As we detail in chapter two, we suggest looking for primary success path
scenarios, secondary success path scenarios, or problem path scenarios to
blueprint.

For current state, we recommend picking 1-4 scenarios to blueprint, and
you may just want to pick the main problem scenario that is painful that you
want to fix. However, don’t just go chasing customer pain. There are cases
when a customer’s experience can be perfectly delightful, but behind-
the-scenes, the organization is going to great lengths to patch it together
and maintain the appearance of cohesion. In reality, you might be losing
tremendous amounts of time, money, and employee morale by main-
taining a great customer experience by using inefficient and painful internal
processes. By blueprinting a primary path scenario, you can look internally
for opportunities to improve the backstage.

For future state, you’ll want to pick the primary success path and a
secondary success path (or two) covering alternate channels (like in-store,
online store, chat support, etc.) if they are important to design for. In
this way, future-state blueprinting may cover a more comprehensive
end-to-end experience with the key variations of the success path, as this
will be important for creating a complete implementation plan to deliver the
desired experience.



Identifying who to invite
Once you’ve selected scenarios, you can better identify who in each
scenario are the subject matter experts (SMEs) who help represent the
end-to-end. You might need people from marketing, account management,
finance, engineering, customer support, or product design to cover the full
extent of the steps taking place in this cross-functional scenario.

Look at the scenario and identify where do subject matter experts live in
the organization (hint: they are not all on the same team), and bring them all
together in the blueprinting session to map the end-to-end and surface-to-
core of the scenario.



                                                                              Planning and preparation   81
                           Try to pick subject matter experts that are more close to the scenarios.
                           Executives and VPs—while it is great to get them aligned and exposed to
                           the process—are too high level and often don’t know what’s going on in
                           the scenario and can’t contribute to blueprinting. However, you should
                           try to get them to sponsor you, attend kickoffs and midpoint check-ins,
                           and wrap-ups. For the blueprinting session itself, you will want to bring
                           people in who actually know what’s going on in the scenario—this may
                           be frontline staff or customer support agents, for example—and who can
                           either be decision makers (or influencers to those who make the decisions)
                           pertaining to their business function.

                                               You will want to keep your session participants to 6-10
Look across your                               people. If you have less than 6, you probably don’t have
scenario to understand                         enough representation across the scenario. If you have
                                               more than 10, it becomes too unwieldy where too many
who should join the
                                               people are talking and the process drags on too long.
blueprinting session.                          There is a magic sweet spot for collaboration around 6-8
                                               people where you will get extremely productive and fruitful
                           discussion. If you really have questions that no one in the room can answer,
                           that’s what the questions layer is for: to capture the things we need more
                           information about. You can always “parking lot” questions out to other
                           people or have them on call while you are running the session.

                           Some example roles you may want to invite to blueprinting:

                           •	 Experience SME—Someone who can speak to and understand the
                              current state customer experience at each phase of the scenario. Often
                              this might be a customer support person or user researcher, or other
                              voice of the customer owner.

                           •	 Technical—Developers, engineers, or IT staff who can speak to how
                              things are architected, technical constraints, or feasibility for new ideas.

                           •	 Marketing/Communications—Someone who can speak to advertising,
                              marketing, or communications about the service or product offering.
                              Often they know about customer acquisition and onboarding.

                           •	 Product owners—Someone who owns a key area of the offering. A lead
                              who can speak to the product strategy, design, and operations. If you
                              have physical products, they should know about the production pipeline,
                              inventory management, and fulfillment.

82   Your Guide to Blueprinting the Practical Way
•	 Designers—Lead designers who can speak to rationale for why
  something is designed a certain way, or think creatively of new ideas.

•	 Customer support—If your offering has a support component, you will
  want someone who can speak to the various channels of customer
  support, and the operations for how this is run in your organization.

•	 Finance/administration—You may want someone who can speak to
  policies and regulations, as well as billing and financial operations.

•	 Operations—If you have specific leads who run key operational areas of
  the business that are present in the scenario, consider inviting them.

•	 Analytics / Data Science—If your organization has dedicated data
  wranglers who spend their time in the thick of quantitative information,
  having them available before and during can add concrete insights.

•	 Senior Leadership—Last but not least, involving senior leaders early
  as both sponsors and participants adds a perspective that can keep
  the other participants out of the weeds. Senior leaders spend their time
  thinking of the big-picture, which is what the blueprint reveals, often for
  the first time. Senior leaders are critical as sponsons when gathering the
  other roles, as well as helping champion the follow-through and output.

The participants in your session are the ones sharing insights into how
it’s done today, brainstorming ideas for improvement or new designs, or
suggesting proposals for directions, and making decisions for how things in
the backstage will be designed. Consider who might bring deep insights or
creative ideas to the table.

Consider the parable of the blind people and the
elephant. Each person touches a different part of the
elephant and thinks they see something different. The
reason you want many cross-functional roles in the
blueprinting session is because each role is involved in
different areas and has a different perspective.

By assembling a cross-functional team, you get
complete coverage and often for the first time gain a
shared understanding of the holistic picture of how
your business is delivering the experience.



                                                                                Planning and preparation   83
                           Preparing scenarios for
                           blueprinting
                           Doing the work ahead of time to prepare specific scenarios for blueprinting
                           will ensure you can think ahead to who you need in the room to speak to
                           various aspects of the scenario, and how much you want to cover.


                           Current state scenario prep
                           •	 Decide what scenarios to focus on.

                           •	 Understand your current customer experience for those scenarios,
                              either by speaking with a subject matter expert who understands the
                              customer experience, or by doing some user research to speak with
                              customers or walk through their experience yourself.

                           •	 Hold a step definition work session with one or two subject matter
                              experts (who will also participate in the blueprinting workshop) to outline
                              the visible customer experience steps, as well as the hidden backstage
                              steps of each scenario. You will end up with an ordered list of steps
                              that you can use to input into the blueprint format. It doesn’t have to
                              be comprehensive, as you can continue to refine and add more steps
                              during the blueprinting workshop, but it’s good to have a first pass of the
                              step definition done before you blueprint.

                           •	 Document the touchpoints with screenshots or a live demo. If you
                              don’t gather screenshots or photos of your touchpoints ahead of time,
                              you will want to make sure to be able to simulate (if possible) the steps
                              in real-time in the blueprinting session (e.g. if you are going through new
                              customer onboarding, actually create a new customer account in the
                              room and screenshare as you go). This, of course, is much easier to do
                              with digital services, and harder to do with multi-channel services. But
                              if your subject matter experts don’t have a good understanding of what
                              happens at the steps that might not be part of their domain, having a
                              screenshot or doing this real-time as if you were a customer is critical to
                              get everyone aligned on the real experience and build empathy for the
                              customer.




84   Your Guide to Blueprinting the Practical Way
Future state scenario prep
•	 Define the direction for the future-state experience. You don’t need
  this fully fleshed out into great detail, but your team should be aligned on
  what the service or product offering is, and how a customer might move
  through the experience lifecycle to benefit from it. Know in advance at a
  high level what kind of experience you want your customer to have, as
  this will ground your future state blueprinting.

•	 Map the steps at higher level of detail, as you don’t want it so figured
  out that you are inflexible about the experience. As you start to explore
  feasibility and the “how” for the delivery, it may mean you need to
  change some things about the experience and adapt it to work within
  business constraints. You might consider an experience design work
  session before blueprinting to create storyboards or a future-state
  journey map. Bring this to your blueprinting session.




How much time will you need
We believe you can get from blueprinting to actionable insights in a
matter of hours. However, we understand that like any group activity, the
preparation and post-workshop activities add to the overall timeframe.

With this said, you still can make incredible progress in a very short time in
the group setting once you get the right people in the room, looking at the
right scenario.

A current-state blueprinting session can take a little as 90-120 minutes
per scenario, however if your scenarios are sufficiently complex or if you
have multiple scenarios you are trying to get through, we recommend the
following formula for scheduling sessions with your group (spaced a couple
days or no more than one week apart to keep things top of mind):

•	 10 minutes for each top level step

•	 15 minutes for each scenario’s opening orientation




                                                                              Planning and preparation   85
                           Example: if you end up with four scenarios with 15 steps a piece, that
                           would budget 150 minutes, or 2.5 hours, for each scenario. Multiplied by
                           four, that is 10 total hours, plus 60 minutes of orientation = 11 hours total. In
                           workshop terms, that would be: four ~3 hour workshops, or a full-day plus a
                           half-day, or two 6-hour sessions (and don’t forget to include breaks).


                        # Scenarios         Session time needed

                               1            ~ 2 hours (the first scenario often takes longest)

                              2             ~ 3.5 hours (half day workshop, or a 2hr and 1.5hr session)

                              3             ~ 5 hours (round up to a "full day" retreat, or split over 3 sessions)

                              4             ~ 6.5 hours (a "full day" retreat, or split over 3-4 sessions)

                              5             ~ 8 hours (suggest splitting 2 half-day workshops, or 4 sessions)



                           Now, some steps may go much quicker, and some may require much
                           longer deliberation. However, we feel safe recommending no less than 10
                           minutes per step to estimate the time needed. This is like building a piano
                           by hand; it ain’t simple, but it produces music like nothing else.

                                                        Future-state blueprinting, however, always takes
                                                        more time. We recommend you triple the time, so
Plan on having extra time
                                                        expect three 90-minute sessions to get through
for future-state because it                             one main scenario. The reason is that designing
takes longer to discuss and                             something new and deciding how it might work
decide on a new design for                              is a lot harder than trying to understand what is
the experience delivery.                                done today (a sleuthing / investigative activity vs.
                                                        a design activity).

                           If your scenarios have a lot of overlap, expect the first one to take more
                           time, and that as you layer on new “variations” of the scenario, it will go a
                           bit faster to just cover the unique parts of each scenario.

                           As a general rule, we suggest blocking one more session than you think
                           you need (or two). It’s better to have a hold and release it later than scram-
                           bling to get on people’s calendars because you weren’t able to finish in the
                           allotted time.


86   Your Guide to Blueprinting the Practical Way
Roles for running an effective
session
You will need a few roles to help you in the session to make sure it goes
smoothly:

•	 Facilitator—that’s you! The blueprint facilitator keeps the process moving
  and keeps the group focused on the steps and providing the needed
  detail. The role is all about inquiring and listening, and guiding the
  discussion.

•	 Notetaker—a person dedicated to capturing all the info on the
  blueprinting template. Building the blueprint digitally requires someone
  do it on the computer as you go and it can be difficult to capture all the
  information while also facilitating, so it helps to have a separate notetaker
  to assist you.

•	 Scenario owners—subject matter expert who has some ownership over
  each scenario (for example, for a scenario covering user acquisition
  and onboarding, there may be owners in your organization who are in
  charge of these). This person knows the scenario and keeps the group
  on target. They know enough about the “knowns and unknowns” to
  prompt the group for additional information critical to the blueprint. This
  is typically the project driver. The blueprinting facilitator and the scenario
  owner can be the same person. However, it is very difficult to keep
  the blueprint session moving forward without a subject matter expert
  keeping the group on relevant areas of exploration.

These roles will really help your session go smoothly. If you can’t get all
these roles, just go a little slower to make sure you capture all the informa-
tion that comes up during the session.




                                                                                Planning and preparation   87
                           Remote, hybrid, and in-person
                           workshop strategies
                           Because blueprinting is a cross-functional group activity, it is highly likely
                           that you will need to run it as a hybrid or remote activity as it’s difficult
                           (especially post-pandemic) to get people onsite in the same physical loca-
                           tion. Of course, this will depend on your organization and your situation.
                           We recommend fully remote so that everyone is on the same level playing
                           field during the session. You absolutely can run blueprinting in-person,
                           however we have a few tips for you to consider.


                           Facilitation Tips (regardless of remote / hybrid / in-person)
                           •	 Use a shared digital whiteboard to capture the blueprint. You may or
                              may not want to invite the team members to join the whiteboard and
                              contribute directly by adding stickies (depends on their familiarity/comfort
                              with the tool and your facilitation preference—you may prefer to control
                              the way you capture information so that it is more consistent).

                           •	 Both the facilitator and notetaker should be in the whiteboard, taking
                              notes and using the visual to ground the group’s discussion.

                           •	 The facilitator shares their screen of the whiteboard to anchor the group.


                           Fully Remote tips
                           •	 Everyone is on a level playing field, joining remotely from their laptops

                           •	 Meet using a video conference tool of choice (e.g., Zoom)


                           Hybrid tips (some in a room, some online)
                           •	 Hybrid is always harder (when you have some people onsite in person
                              in a room, and some joining remotely). However, you should facilitate it
                              similarly by sharing your screen as an anchor for the group discussion.

                           •	 Consider having one facilitator or notetaker physically in the room, and
                              one remotely to help bridge between the two groups

                           •	 Every team member should bring their laptop to see the whiteboard

                           •	 Meet using a video conference tool of choice (e.g., Zoom) to bridge
                              between the room and remote participants


88   Your Guide to Blueprinting the Practical Way
      Scenario name                                      Pre-write out
                                                         the steps                                                                                                                                                     Printouts of touchpoints

                      Scenario 1: Name of the scenario

                               1                  2                   3                   4                    5                   6                   7                   8                  9                   10                 11                      12                 13                   14
                         -----------------   -----------------   -----------------   -----------------   -----------------    -----------------   -----------------   -----------------   -----------------   -----------------    -----------------      -----------------   -----------------   -----------------
                            ------------        ------------        ------------        ------------        ------------         ------------       ------------         ------------        ------------        ------------         ------------          ------------         ------------        ------------




Color key



Supplies




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Butcher paper
                                                       Painter's tape                                                        Swim lanes can help the
                                                                                                                             group more easily add or
                                                                                                                             move stickies




            In-person tips (everyone in the same room)
            •	 We still recommend using a digital whiteboard tool, as it’s a pain to move
              a dozen paper stickies over in the middle of a session if you suddenly
              realize you need to go back and insert a step. Additionally, typing up
              and digitizing all the paper stickies later can be very time consuming and
              hard to read people’s handwriting.

            •	 However, if you really want to have a more engaging hands-on session,
              you could use paper and stickies to build the blueprint. If you do this, you
              will need to do a lot more prep ahead of time to ensure you have printed
              physical keys to color-code the stickies for everyone, and ensure they
              are using the right colors as you go. Here are some additional tips:

               »	 Get enough colors of stickies one for each layer type, and we suggest
                 using the smaller stickies so you can fit more on the sheet

               »	 Have a print-out key made with the sticky colors you have available

               »	 Prep a butcher paper template set up

               »	 Create a grid on your template that can fit 4 small stickies per grid unit
                 (swim lanes for each layer type)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Planning and preparation                                       89
                               »	 Use bigger stickies for all labels on the blueprint so they are
                                  moveable (the layer types, and the steps)

                               »	 Print and tape the step definitions and pictures of touchpoints at the
                                  top of your butcher paper template

                               »	 Have enough wall space and enough people space in the room to all
                                  stand around the wall (scope this out ahead of time)


                           What to do if you can’t get everyone in the “room”
                           If you are having a hard time assembling the group, do the best you can
                           to get a critical mass of functional roles represented. You can ask the
                           attendees who are not able to make it whether they can delegate to
                           another team member to represent their subject matter expertise.

                           After the session, if you can follow up to meet with the people who did not
                           attend to review the blueprint with them and get their input, this is defi-
                           nitely possible, however it will add more time and they will not benefit from
                           hearing the group’s discussion. As we have shared earlier in the book, part
                           of the power of blueprinting is having the conversation with the group
                           so that they can gain shared understanding and alignment across the
                           end-to-end of the scenario.

                           This is best done in real-time, together.



                           Tools for blueprinting
                           We recommend using a virtual whiteboard tool (such as Mural) to build
                           the blueprint in real-time. Leverage our practical blueprinting templates
                           to make this easier and get started. While there are other tools you might
                           consider if you want to adapt the blueprinting format to work better in the
                           context of your organization, this activity requires quick flexibility to move
                           stickies around, insert columns, and more. In this section, we talk about the
                           various types of tools you can use for blueprinting and the benefits and
                           drawbacks of each.




90   Your Guide to Blueprinting the Practical Way
Virtual whiteboards
We highly recommend using a virtual whiteboard to build your blueprint.
We use Mural and have several templates available to get you started on
our website (www.practicalbydesign.co).

The benefits of a virtual whiteboard:

•	 Accessible by remote, hybrid anywhere

•	 Easy to move stickies around

•	 Flexibility to add notes and other comments or diagrams

•	 The content is digitized and portable

The drawbacks of using a virtual whiteboard:

•	 You, as the facilitator, are in charge of structuring the data and ensuring
  the integrity of the template as you build it out (e.g., people use the
  correct sticky colors for each layer)


Spreadsheets
You can use a spreadsheet (like Google Sheets) to collaboratively make a
blueprint. However, it is harder to insert or export information.

The benefits of a spreadsheet:

•	 Accessible by remote, hybrid anywhere

•	 Your team may be more familiar with this tool

•	 The content is digitized and portable via copy/paste

•	 The format enforces structure and may be easier for the team to add to

The drawbacks of using a spreadsheet:

•	 There is a tendency to create swimlanes (one row per layer), and then
  the data gets lumped together in one cell (e.g. a list of systems: “Google
  Drive, Zapier”) and it is harder to have the data generated by easily
  ported via copy/paste

•	 Less flexibility to insert rows/columns or notes


                                                                                 Planning and preparation   91
                           Paper (physical in-person)
                           Butcher paper, stickies, sharpies… If you are excited to host an in-person
                           retreat-style blueprinting session, the energy of the room can be invigo-
                           rating and it can be a fantastic activity to do hands-on. However, the reality
                           of our workplaces makes this more and more difficult to organize.

                           If you want to do a hands-on working session in-person, you will need: A
                           large surface (paper roll or foamcore board), printouts/stickies pre-written
                           with each step, different colored sticky notes for each type of layer prefer-
                           ably, and a color key so that people use the correct colors.

                           The benefits of paper in-person:

                           •	 Fun, energizing, focused in-person activity will be highly engaging

                           •	 More team members will get involved in making content on stickies and
                              will lead to a more energized session

                           •	 Easy for team members to participate

                           The drawbacks of using paper in-person:

                           •	 A wall or whiteboard can only accommodate so many people at once
                              before they’re shoulder-to-shoulder, which hinders coequal collaboration

                           •	 It can feel more like a one-off “teambuilding fun-time” instead of work,
                              which is one reason we say that blueprinting is “work, not a workshop”

                           •	 It is really hard to insert steps, columns, or rows because once you have
                              so many stickies down, it can be very difficult to move them

                           •	 Digitizing all the stickies after the fact can be extremely tedious and time
                              consuming, and hard to read people’s handwriting

                           •	 Preparing for the session requires more work on your part to pre-set up
                              the room.

                           •	 Subject to human fallibility and errors—people might use the wrong
                              colors and be harder to monitor and clean up




92   Your Guide to Blueprinting the Practical Way
Boutique tailored tools
There are now several boutique tailored tools on the market (e.g.,
Custellence, Smaply) that have purpose-built blueprinting templates, as
well as templates that people have developed in many other tools (e.g.
Trello, Omnigraffle). Some of these templates follow our practical blue-
printing format, but may not have all the things you need. Some may
provide more flexibility than others to tailor your blueprint format.

You can also refer to our Mural template and adapt and build it out in a tool
of your choice (and we’d love to see what you create!).

The benefits of a boutique tailored tool:

•	 Purpose-built template may create time savings and is easier to fill out
  because it provides specific spots to add certain information

•	 Purpose-built tools often have additional useful features (e.g., integration
  with other apps, or ability to have it be a more “living” blueprint)

The drawbacks of a boutique tailored tool:

•	 Often not enough flexibility to tailor the template to fit your needs, or
  match our practical format

•	 May or may not be harder to get information in and out of the tool

•	 May or may not be collaborative

•	 Costs and licensing




                                                                               Planning and preparation   93
Chapter Six

Facilitating
Blueprinting
The big day has finally come! You have your cross-functional team assem-
bled, your notetaker ready, and your scenarios prepared. You have your
blueprinting template all set up and are ready to facilitate your first blue-
printing session!

For each scenario you are blueprinting, follow the steps we outline in this
section. As the facilitator, you will be the one creating the blueprint in
the template file (with your notetaker’s help), while the subject matter
experts contribute and discuss. If you have a particularly engaged team
savvy in the tool you are using, they may also jump in and add to the blue-
print directly.


                                                                                95
                           Facilitation steps
                           1) Introduction to blueprinting
                           If this is the first time your group has met to blueprint, you will want to start
                           with an introduction to blueprinting and how you will collaborate using
                           the template and tool. Explain the roles of the facilitator, the notetaker, the
                           scenario owner, and the participants—the subject matter experts. Explain
                           what a blueprint is, the format of the blueprint, why it is valuable, and what
                           you will get from it. Explain the agenda and how you will collaborate to
                           fill out the template, and what will happen after the session. (Refer to our
                           template kits to get a starter intro slidedeck and facilitator script!)


                           2) Review the scenario to get on the same page
                           Review the scenario with the group, going over the high level description
                           ensuring everyone understands the use case. Quickly go through each of
                           the step definitions from start to finish so the group can hear the scenario
                           in its entirety. Make sure you all agree on and understand the scope of the
                           scenario. This is important, as some of your participants won’t have visi-
                           bility into certain phases of your scenario. This is a learning opportunity
                           for everyone in the room, and it also gives you a chance to add any steps
                           you missed in your prep-work, or edit the steps to more accurately reflect
                           what is happening. For future-state, this may stay at a higher level, as you
                           may not have every step detailed out yet. The goal here is to get everyone
                           aligned on what you have so far, and grounded for the discussion. You may
                           end up re-ordering, removing, changing, or adding steps here. This is fine,
                           that is why you’re inviting so many more eyeballs to be part of the review.


                           3) Start making the blueprint
                           Starting with the first step, going left-to-right and one step at a time, the
                           facilitator prompts the group to provide information for each layer. Use the
                           layers as a checklist to have a comprehensive conversation about that
                           step. Current-state example: “What roles are doing things in this step?”
                           or “Are there any systems being used in this step?” Future-state example:
                           “What roles might we need to deliver this step?” or “What systems would
                           we need for this step?”




96   Your Guide to Blueprinting the Practical Way
 4) March across the columns one at a time
 Move from step to step, filling in layers, prompting the group along the way
 to add their information. Use the layer types as a checklist. When there
 doesn’t seem to be any pertinent information left to add, move on to the
 next step definition. It is ok not to have something for every layer in each
 step. It is also OK to have more than one item per layer in the same step.


 5) Run through the scenario again to validate
 Once the scenario has been fleshed out to a reasonable degree, go back
 and read through it with the details now added to look for overlooked
 information or ideas or ways to make the future-state more cohesive. For
 current-state, you may take this chance to brainstorm ideas for each step
 or each critical moment you identified in blueprinting. Separating ideation
 from capturing the current state can be very helpful. Blueprinting will be
 somewhat iterative, combing across the blueprint, you may go back and
 review and adjust as you explore further steps.


 6) Move on to the next scenario
 When the scenario feels like it has documented the end-to-end, surface-to-
 core picture, you can then move on to the next scenario until you have all
 the scenarios you wanted to blueprint completed.

 Get as far as you can get in a single session and pick up where you left
 off the last time. If you’ve broken your scenario down into phases, try to
 complete a phase before taking a break.
                                                                ---- Example Blueprinting Session Agenda from www.practicalservicedesign.com ----




Get these templates and more at                    Project Name Blueprinting Session

      practicalbydesign.co                         10/25/2017

                                                   Facilitators:
                                                                                                                                                                                   Blueprinting Facilitator Cheatsheet
                                                      ● Jane Doe                                                                                                                    A quick reference guide to the blueprinting terminology and format.
                                                      ● John Smith

                                                   Working group participants:                                                                                                                                                                 Scenarios exist within
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               different areas of your
                                                     ● Sally Smith, Marketing
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               service. Break down a
                                                     ● Jim Doe, Customer Care                                                                                                                                                                  scenario to ﬁgure out
                                                     ● Tim Smith, Product                                                                                                                                                                      who should attend your
                                                     ● Mary Doe, Operations                                                                                                                                                                    blueprinting session.

                                                   Session Agenda:
                                                                                                                                                                                        The journey becomes a scenario…                        Use real data on
                                                   [10:00am] Welcome and introductions
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               customer journeys to
                                                          Welcome everyone and go around to introduce yourselves.                                                                                                                              inform your blueprint.
                                                   [10:05am] Introduction to goals of the workshop and blueprinting

                                                          The purpose of this blueprinting session is to map the end-to-end and surface-to-core of this particular                      Break your scenario into phases                                           Step visibility
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                The Layers
                                                          scenario. We asked all of you here in order to create a true understanding of all aspects of this service
                                                          experience.

                                                          Introduce blueprinting using example slidedeck.


 Intro to Practical Experience Blueprinting        [10:15am] Overview of the scenario and steps

                                                          To make today go more smoothly, we have already prepared and defined the specific steps of the
                                                                                                                                                                                        End-to-End
                                                          scenario. That said, if as we go you believe we are missing a step, please speak up. Letʼs now review the
 Practical by Design // www.practicalbydesign.co
                                                                                                                                                                      Surface-to-Core




                                                          steps in order to make sure we are all on the same page.

                                                   [10:25am] Review layer definitions

                                                          A service blueprint is made of several layers. Now that we understand the top layer—the step
                                                          definition—letʼs look at each of the underlying layers. For each step there may be one or more (or none)
                                                          of each of these layers. [Go through each layer type with examples].

                                                          Any questions before we get started?

                                                   [10:30am] Blueprinting




                                                                                                                                                                                    www.practicalbydesign.co                                      @erik_ﬂowers @meganerinmiller




                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Facilitating Blueprinting                             97
                           Top-to-Bottom or Left-to-Right?
                           When filling out the blueprint, we recommend going one step at a time
                           linearly through the scenario, as while it is tempting to fill out each layer
                           as its own swimlane all the way across (e.g. filling in all roles first, then all
                           processes, etc.), it leads to less cohesive understanding of the depth of
                           each step and the experience delivery. We find it works better to get a
                           complete picture at each step before moving on to the next so that the
                           group can build that shared understanding.

                           A blueprint that is half-finished but the half that was completed with all
                           layers (top-to-bottom) is still of value, as each completed “column” of the
                           surface-to-core is actionable. However, a blueprint that is half-finished, but
                           it’s only the few surface-level layers that are finished is of little value—if
                           you don’t get to the bottom of anything, then you’ve got to the bottom of
                           nothing.

                           So, trust us on this one: go one step at a time and complete the step
                           top-to-bottom, not one layer at a time left-to-right.


                                                                                                             




                               Completing a portion of the blueprint steps with all layers is more
                             actionable than only completing some of the layers all the way across.




98   Your Guide to Blueprinting the Practical Way
      Current State
Facilitation Cheat Sheet
LAYER                   FACILITATOR SCRIPT SUGGESTIONS


Steps                   “What is the key action happening that defines this step?
                        Is it visible or hidden?”

Touchpoints             “What is the touchpoint for this step?”


Roles                   “What roles are participating in this step?”


Technology              “What technology systems or technical infrastructure are
                        involved in this step?”


Policies                “Are there any policies, rules, or guidelines that are in
                        play in this step?”


Processes               “What support processes go into this step, or are
                        necessary for this step to happen?”


Questions               “Any questions we still have about this step?”


Notes                   “Any additional information we want to capture here?”


Metrics                 “Any data or analytics to capture that might be relevant
                        to this step or helpful for us to know?”


Critical                “What are the potential problems that can happen in this
Moments                 step, breakdowns in the experience or the backstage?”

Opportunities           “Any ideas for how we can address those critical
                        moments or improve the experience at this step?”


          Get digital, sharable, and printable copies of all reference pages at pbd.pub/posters
       Future State
Facilitation Cheat Sheet
 Use these scripted prompts to facilitate populating the blueprint.

LAYER                   FACILITATOR SCRIPT SUGGESTIONS


Steps                   “What is the key action that defines this step? Is it visible
                        or hidden?”

Touchpoints             “What is the touchpoint for this step?”


Roles                   “What roles need to participate in this step?”


Technology              “What technology systems or technical infrastructure
                        might we need in this step?”


Policies                “Do we need any policies, rules, or guidelines related to
                        this step?”


Processes               “What support processes are necessary for this step to
                        happen?”


Questions               “Any questions we still have about this step?”


Notes                   “Any additional information we want to capture here?”


Rationale               “Let’s document our rationale for why we designed this
                        step this way.”


Potential               “What are the ways this step could break down, either
Pitfalls                the experience or the delivery? Let’s plan for possible
                        breakdowns.”


           Get digital, sharable, and printable copies of all reference pages at pbd.pub/posters
Chapter Seven

Taking
action after
blueprinting
Blueprinting results in actionable insights that help you to improve existing
experiences as well as design how new ones can be delivered. In this
section, we walk you through each of the outputs of blueprinting, and what
to do with them. This is the secret sauce that connects the dots from work-
shop to work.


                                                                                103
                            What to do after current-state
                            blueprinting
                            After you’ve created a current-state blueprint, you will have a lot of great
                            information that helps to paint the picture of what is actually happening
                            today for that particular scenario, and you will have captured many action-
                            able insights (through the critical moments, opportunities/ideas, and
                            questions). Once you’ve got a finished blueprint, it’s time to get the action-
                            able insights out of the blueprint and turn them into real work for your
                            organization!

                            After blueprinting, you want separate time set aside to do a synthesis
                            session with the same participants that were in the blueprinting session.
                            Ideally, your synthesis session happens close in time to the blueprinting
                            session. You can do these back-to-back if you have a half day or whole day
                            set aside for blueprinting, or you can have a synthesis session the next day
                            or sometime in the next week or so. Don’t wait too long to do synthesis, but
                            if you have to, just block some time for review with your participants.


                            Doing synthesis after current-state blueprinting
                            After blueprinting, you will want to harvest out all the questions, critical
                            moments, and opportunities and start to group them into thematic areas so
                            that you can take action. The goal of this step is to take the crucial pieces
                            of information you gained through blueprinting and put them all in one
                            place for analysis. This is especially important if you are trying to integrate
                      Blueprinting
                         insights fromSynthesis
                                       multiple blueprinting sessions (over more than one scenario).

                             1                                         2                                3                                          4

                          Collect                         Group (& label)                         Tactical vs.                             Articulate
                                                                                                   Strategic                                Insights
                                                     Category

                                                                                                     Category
                                                                           Category
                                                                                       Tactical                                         Category

                                                                                                                                        Problem Statement

                                                                                      Strategic

                                                                                                                                        Strategic Themes

                                                            Category


                                                                                                                 Insights Spreadsheet   Tactical Fixes




104   Your Guide to Blueprinting the Practical Way
By collecting all the critical moments and ideas from all your related blue-
prints, you can generate more holistic insights for improvement.

Imagine you have done four blueprinting sessions on different scenarios.
You have generated dozens of critical moments and ideas. By dumping
them all together, you can start to see larger themes emerge, and begin
the process of prioritizing and weighting each insight. We suggest typing
up your critical moments and ideas into a spreadsheet. That way, you can
track the source of each, and add additional metadata such as weight,
priority, theme, or stakeholder information.

You can start to bucket your themes into two types: strategic themes vs.
tactical fixes.


Strategic Themes                                   Tactical Fixes
•	 Overarching across the opportunity space        •	 Specific, concrete action items

•	 Long-term changes/innovations                   •	 Immediate common-sense changes

•	 Requires a shared vision                        •	 Requires owners and drivers

•	 Tied back to principles                         •	 Tied to immediate needs/triage

•	 Broad thinking                                  •	 Focused thinking


Strategic themes are things that might impact the overall direction of
the service, or have bigger implications for your organization. These are
possible changes you might want to make to the overall service that will
need discussion, evaluation, and leadership buy-in.

Tactical fixes are things you can just go do now that you would pass to
the specific teams in your organization to further define and prioritize that
work. These might end up directly in product backlogs, or in the hands of a
project or product manager.

The true value of blueprinting is the actionable insights generated
through capturing critical moments and ideas from your stakeholder
team. Through critical moments, you gain insight into the overall pain
present in the scenario, and through ideas, you gain insight into the oppor-
tunity to improve the experience.




                                                                         Taking action after blueprinting   105
                            Current-state blueprinting
                            synthesis process
                            1. Harvest your blueprint for actionable insights
                            The first step is to mine all the questions, critical moments, and opportuni-
                            ties/ideas from your blueprints—copy them out and put them all into one
                            place, either a Mural board, document, or spreadsheet.


                            2. Track where the stickies came from
                            If you have multiple blueprints, make sure you track where all the stickies
                            came from by adding an ID number to match which sticky came from which
                            blueprint.


                            3. Group into themes
                            In your synthesis session, read through each sticky out loud and start to
                            group like stickies or stickies that seem related. Group the stickies that are
                            alike and try to give the group a name. It’s OK to iterate on this process,
                            consolidate buckets, rename them and get to a place where you have
                            several unique top-level buckets emerging. (Example themes: inconsis-
                            tent user experience, unclear messaging to customer, promotion and
                            marketing, rationalize pricing, etc.)


                            4. Identify tactical fixes vs. strategic themes
                            Once you’ve identified your top themes, you are going to take a look at
                            each theme and break down the stickies in the theme into two catego-
                            ries: strategic directions and tactical fixes. Believe it or not, this is probably
                            where 50% of the value of the entire endeavor manifests! Doing the blue-
                            print is just the journey, but this is the destination.


                            5. Stay organized using a themes worksheet
                            Use our theme worksheet template to articulate the theme, or track all your
                            insights using a theme spreadsheet. The theme spreadsheet lets you track
                            each insight, the related scenario, related critical moments and ideas, and
                            identify the owners of the insight and who will actually be responsible for




106   Your Guide to Blueprinting the Practical Way
getting that work done. This is a great way to archive the insights from your
blueprinting session and turn them into a real backlog of work.


6. Craft a problem statement for each theme
One thing that is important to craft is a problem statement around the
theme. This is your one-sentence elevator pitch of the problem. This
problem statement is an important tool for communicating what you’ve
uncovered to other stakeholders who were not present during blueprinting
or synthesis. Example: Theme: Unclear Messaging; Problem Statement:
Through our onboarding, we don’t provide clear and consistent messaging
to our end users, resulting in confusion around policies and status of
purchase.


7. Socialize and take action
Your blueprint has become an actionable backlog of problems and ideas
that need to be brainstormed, prioritized, and tested with the teams that
can implement changes. You’ll need to take the strategic, high-level
insights and discuss those with your stakeholders across your organiza-
tion. And you’ll need to help facilitate getting those tactical insights into the
correct team’s backlog.

The ideas that have emerged from your blueprint are now ready for you
to go ideate, prioritize, prototype, and test. Take the themes that have
emerged back to the teams that will be responsible for implementing them,
and brainstorm how you can solve some of the critical moments that have
emerged during blueprinting, and evaluate the ideas that arose.

Your blueprint is literally a backlog of work, and you need to use that
backlog to make an action plan with your organization. Don’t just let it sit
on a shelf—make sure you take the output of your session and move
forward to make change.
                                           Theme Name
                                           May 30, 2022

                                           Problem Statement
                                           What is the core statement that summarizes the problem?




Get these templates and more at            Strategic Themes


      practicalbydesign.co
                                           What strategic themes do you see throughout your ﬁndings that can inform higher level,
                                           longer term re-envisioning of the overall service?




                                           Tactical Fixes
                                           What are some tactical ﬁxes you have found that are immediately actionable and can
                                           improve the service without needing to wait for a strategic shift?




                                                                                                                                    Taking action after blueprinting   107
                            Current-state blueprinting
                            outputs and what to do with them
                            Steps
                            Use this to tell the end-to-end story and build a shared understanding of the
                            scenario and the experience and what is really happening.


                            Touchpoints
                            Think of this as an inventory of all touchpoints that go into an experience. Use this
                            to review all touchpoints in the inventory for consistency and cohesion. Work with
                            touchpoint owners/designers to get these to feel more connected, integrated, or
                            similarly designed.


                            Roles
                            Now you really know the complete picture of who is involved in the experience
                            delivery. Use this list to follow up with all people in those roles to build a shared
                            understanding of the current state and engage them in improvement efforts.
                            Additionally, you may have identified gaps in roles where you need to create a
                            new role to better support the experience. Review all roles to create a RACI and
                            further clarify roles and responsibilities.


                            Technology
                            Looking end-to-end at all technical systems involved in the experience delivery
                            can produce ideas for further simplification or integration across these systems.
                            Bring this to your technical teams to see what ideas they have for efficiencies or
                            optimization.


                            Policies
                            Now that you’ve collected all the policies at play in the scenario, you can review
                            to see if these policies still make sense, or whether there are any gaps to address
                            for your business. What of these might be barriers internally to getting things
                            done? Or what restrictions are limiting your customer experience?




108   Your Guide to Blueprinting the Practical Way
Processes
By identifying all the support processes in your blueprint, you have created
a process inventory of the related organizational processes. Now you
might consider mapping the details of each of those support processes
if you think they are at the root cause of customer or internal pain points.
Consider process mapping each support process to identify further
improvement opportunities on the backstage. This may be beneficial to
improve cycle time, reduce delays, and improve inefficiencies.


Questions
Collect all questions you had across each scenario and use these to follow
up with relevant parties and gain further insights.


Notes
Most often, these notes just stay in the blueprint, however, you might
review them to see if there are any key action items or decisions docu-
mented there that you want to pull out of the blueprint format.


Metrics
Metrics simply inform data insights at each step and often stay in the
blueprint.


Critical Moments
Collect all critical moments and consider an ideation session where you
brainstorm ideas/solutions to address each critical moment. Then, take
all your critical moments and ideas and group them into thematic areas,
tactical and strategic. Work these into an action plan for improvement!


Opportunities
Collect all your opportunities, and group them with your critical moments
and ideas, and group them into thematic areas, tactical and strategic. Work
these into an action plan for improvement!




                                                                         Taking action after blueprinting   109
                            What to do after future-state
                            blueprinting
                            Future-state blueprinting results in a literal blueprint for how you will “build
                            your house” of operational delivery and organizational structures to create
                            the desired future-state experience. Once you’ve completed future-state
                            blueprinting, your job is to connect the dots between the blueprint and
                            how your organization will actually implement it. We do this with an imple-
                            mentation plan.


                            How to do planning after future-state blueprinting
                            By harvesting out each type of layer from the blueprint, you can start to
                            build out the next steps your organization needs to take in order to imple-
                            ment the design. Use our template to act on your future state blueprinting
                            output found at www.practicalbydesign.co.


                            Steps
                            Use this to tell the end-to-end story of how the new experience will work
                            and build a shared understanding of where you are heading with your
                            service or product offering.


                            Touchpoints
                            You now have an inventory of all touchpoints that need to get created in
                            order to deliver the experience. Define owners and the next steps to get
                            the design and development of these touchpoints going.


                            Roles
                            Create a RACI and clarify responsibilities for the roles needed to support
                            the new experience delivery. Work with leadership to determine whether
                            new roles need to get created, or how these roles will get staffed.


                            Technology
                            Now that you have a complete picture of the technical systems needed to
                            deliver the new experience, you can look at what already exists, or define
                            what needs to get developed or purchased (3rd party). Use this to inform
                            technical project plans and roadmaps.

110   Your Guide to Blueprinting the Practical Way
Policies
Collect the list of policies that need to get defined, and determine owners
who will be responsible for further fleshing out and finalizing each policy,
ensuring that these are documented and align with the business practices.


Processes
You now have an inventory of all the support processes that you will need
to design in order to support the experience delivery. Conduct future-state
process design sessions with relevant stakeholders to start to design the
operations. Document via process maps and standard operating proce-
dures (SOPs).


Questions
Collect all open questions and triage them to get them addressed by
appropriate parties.


Notes
Most often, these notes just stay in the blueprint, however, you might
review them to see if there are any key action items or decisions docu-
mented there that you want to pull out of the blueprint format.


Rationale
Rationale can stay in the blueprint, or be pulled out to help develop a busi-
ness case for the new design if needed for socialization.


Potential Pitfalls
Copy out all potential pitfalls and group them into themes (with similar).
Brainstorm solutions if not already addressed in the blueprint design.
Discuss and work the solutions back into the blueprint. In this way, you are
doing risk mitigation and building resilience into the design of the experi-
ence delivery.




                                                                         Taking action after blueprinting   111
                            Going from workshop to work
                            After blueprinting, you will need to connect the dots to an action plan. We
                            recommend following the cultural best practices in your organization to
                            get work done, whether that is creating a charter, populating a backlog,
                            meeting with each relevant stakeholder, or creating a project plan. Find the
                            way that work gets done in your organization, and start connecting dots!


                            Essential ways you can go from workshop to work
                            •	 Socialize the output of the blueprint
                               Share the story of your blueprint—the problem you wanted to solve,
                               or the new design you wanted to realize—and build awareness and
                               buy-in for the organization to take action. Present a clear proposal
                               for improvement or implementation of the new design. Engage key
                               stakeholders in the organization to be advocates for taking action, and
                               don’t forget to get your senior leaders to champion the method and your
                               efforts as much as you can! Remember, the end-to-end, surface-to-core
                               macro view of the business is typically the things only leadership are
                               solely responsible for in the long run.

                            •	 Identify accountable owners to move the work forward
                               Find homes for the next steps, and get people to own the work. For
                               example, if you’ve come up with concrete tactical fixes, figure out how
                               to get them in the right backlogs of the right teams. If you have bigger
                               picture strategic directions you want to go, find a sponsor of the work to
                               push forward a proposal or assemble leadership to discuss the direction.

                            •	 Create a concrete implementation plan
                               For implementation of new designs, ensure that the work gets organized
                               (project management) and that each functional area is engaged to
                               develop a concrete implementation plan with timelines and milestones.




112   Your Guide to Blueprinting the Practical Way
                                         You may feel like some of this isn’t your role. However, as the facilitator
                                         of blueprinting, your job is to connect the dots and help to educate your
                                         team about the process. And yes, there may be things that aren’t officially
                                         on your job description to do, but you can be the bridge to help move this
                                         work forward in a new way for your organization. This is a chance for you
                                         to be a leader, whether officially via title or not, and walk your team through
                                         a customer-centric process to improve or design how they deliver great
                                         experiences.



                                                                                         Get these templates and more at
                                                                                               practicalbydesign.co
✨ 6. Action plan
The goal of this section is to take your future state blueprint and turn it into an action plan. We will "harvest" the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Post-Blueprinting Action Plan
different stickies from the blueprint in order to define what you need to implement in order to realize your design.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Use this action plan template to help put your blueprinting into action! For each theme
 Touchpoints                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Policies                                                                                                                    you uncovered in blueprinting, identify your next steps. Go to File → “Make a copy” to add
  1. Identify unique touchpoints                                                                    2. Assign owners for each touchpoint
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              this as an editable doc to your Google Drive.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1. Identify unique policies                                                        2. Identify policy owners and next steps
  Copy all the blue stickies (touchpoints) into this area. Group duplicates into                    Copy the unique touchpoints here. For each, assign an owner who will lead the implementation for that
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Copy all the orange stickies (policies) into this area. Group duplicates into      Copy the unique policies here. For each, identify the policy owner. Summarize the next steps needed to
  clusters so that you can identify all the unique touchpoints.                                     touchpoint. Note down any next steps needed to design the touchpoints.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  clusters so that you can identify the unique policies that need to get defined.    define and implement the policy.


                                                                                                              Touchpoint         Owner           Next steps                   Touchpoint          Owner          Next steps
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Policy             Owner
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Theme name
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Next steps                      Policy                Owner         Next steps


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Problem statement goes here.
                                                                                                              Touchpoint         Owner           Next steps                   Touchpoint          Owner          Next steps
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Policy             Owner      Next steps                      Policy                Owner         Next steps




                                                                                                              Touchpoint         Owner           Next steps
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Policy             Owner
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Insight
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Next steps
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Who needs to be                             What is the next   Done by
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  involved?                                   step?              when?
                                                                                                              Touchpoint         Owner           Next steps
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Policy             Owner      Next steps
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Strategic insight 1
                                                                                                              Touchpoint         Owner           Next steps
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Policy             Owner
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Strategic insight 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Next steps




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (repeat rows as
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               needed)
 Roles                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Potential pitfalls
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Tactical ﬁx 1
  1. Identify unique roles                                                                          2. Define responsibilities and resourcing
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1. Identify related pitfalls                                                       2. Brainstorm solutions for pitfalls
   Copy all the green stickies (roles) into this area. Group duplicates into clusters                Copy the unique roles here. For each, describe the key responsibilities of the role. Think about how it might
   so that you can identify the unique roles needed to deliver the experience.                       get resourced.                                                                                                               Copy all the red stickies (pitfalls) into this area. Group similar pitfalls into
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  clusters so that you can brainstorm solutions (if not already addressed in the     the blueprint design.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Tactical ﬁx 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Copy the pitfall categories here. For each, brainstorm some solutions. Discuss and work solutions back into

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  blueprint design).
                                                                                                                 Role           Description      Resourcing                      Role           Description      Resourcing
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Pitfall category                        (repeat rows    as
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Pitfall category

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               needed)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Ideas              Ideas                                      Ideas                Ideas
                                                                                                                  Role          Description      Resourcing                      Role           Description      Resourcing




                                                                                                                  Role          Description       Resourcing




                                                                                                                  Role          Description       Resourcing
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Pitfall category
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Theme name             Pitfall category


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Ideas              Ideas                                      Ideas                Ideas

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Problem statement goes here.
                                                                                                                  Role          Description       Resourcing




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Insight                                                            Who needs to be                             What is the next   Done by
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  involved?                                   step?              when?
  Processes                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Questions                                                                                                                    Strategic insight 1
  1. Identify unique processes                                                                       2. Identify process owners and next steps                                                                                    1. Identify related questions                                                      2. Identify a person to answer the questions
   Copy all the pink stickies (processes) into this area. Group duplicates into                      Copy the unique policies here. For each, identify who will own the process. Note any next steps needed to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Strategic   insight                                   2
   clusters so that you can identify the unique processes that need to be designed.                  design each process.                                                                                                         Copy all the purple stickies (questions) into this area. Group related questions   Copy the question groups here. For each, identify who will seek answers. Write down any next steps to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  into clusters so that you can identify a point person to answer them.              answer the questions.

                                                                                                                 Process          Owner           Next steps                     Process           Owner             Next steps
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (repeat rows as
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Question group           Owner
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               needed)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Next steps                 Question group               Owner        Next steps




                                                                                                                 Process           Owner          Next steps                     Process            Owner            Next steps
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Question group           Owner    Tactical ﬁx 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Next steps                 Question group               Owner        Next steps




                                                                                                                 Process           Owner           Next steps
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Question group           Owner      Next steps




                                                                                                                 Process           Owner           Next steps
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Question group           Owner      Next steps




                                                                                                                 Process           Owner           Next steps
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Question group           Owner      Next steps




  Systems                                                                                                                                                                                                                         General planning

  1. Identify unique systems                                                                         2. Identify system owners and next steps                                                                                     1. Brainstorm next steps for implementation                                                                                                                                2. Identify owners to move the work forward
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Now take a step back and think about your design at a high level. What needs                                                                                               List your key next steps here. Assign an owner to move the work forward.
   Copy all the gray stickies (systems) into this area. Group duplicates into clusters               Copy the unique systems here. For each, identify the system owner. Describe the next steps needed to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  to be done in order to move the work forward? Do you need to get stakeholder
   so that you can identify the unique systems.                                                      implement any changes to support the new experience.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  buy-in? Do you want to design and test a pilot prototype? Do you want to do
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  more user research? Think together as a group about what needs to be done.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Next step       Owner
                                                                                                                System            Owner           Next steps                     System            Owner             Next steps




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Next step       Owner
                                                                                                                 System           Owner           Next steps                     System            Owner             Next steps




                                                                                                                 System           Owner           Next steps                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Next step       Owner




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Next step       Owner
                                                                                                                 System           Owner           Next steps




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Next step       Owner
                                                                                                                 System           Owner           Next steps
Chapter Eight

Common
blueprinting
questions
Over the years, as we’ve taught blueprinting to thousands of people
around the globe and supported the community in using blueprinting in
their real work contexts, we’ve encountered many recurring questions.
Here’s a collection of some of the ones we feel are most important for you
to get clarity on!


                                                                             115
                            Is blueprinting just applied
                            service design?
                            No. However, blueprinting is a great entry point for thinking more about
                            designing great services, as it is an easy tool for the business to start to
                            think and act in a customer-centric way.

                            Service Design is a design discipline that applies design thinking and
                            human-centered design principles to services. Service Design is a broader
                                                     umbrella that focuses on service experiences and the
Blueprinting is a core                               complexity that goes into service delivery. In this way,
method of service design.                            it has a lot of overlap with design research, experi-
                                                     ence design, and business design.

                            Blueprinting is a core method in service design, as it is the primary way
                            to connect the front and the backstage—an essential aspect of designing
                            great service experiences. There are many other methods, however, that a
                            service designer might use to assess service experiences, develop service
                            strategy, designs, and delivery.



                            Why “Practical” Blueprinting
                            (vs. traditional service
                            blueprinting)?
                            When we created the practical blueprint format in 2015, we were trying to
                            find more practical, actionable ways to do service design in a real work
                            context. The “traditional” service blueprint format leverages swim lanes
                                                     and arrows that in the reality of an actual workshop

Practical blueprinting                               session were almost impossible to map in real-time
                                                     with stakeholders. We tried and failed to leverage
focuses on making it as
                                                     this mapping format in real work contexts and it was
easy as possible to make                             disappointing, frustrating, and we knew there was a
the blueprint in real-time                           better way to unlock the benefits of blueprinting in
with stakeholders.                                   real time.




116   Your Guide to Blueprinting the Practical Way
We iterated and tried different things until we landed on the practical blue-
printing format, with which we found great success in our workplaces. Our
blueprinting format emphasizes making the actual process of blueprinting
more practical and optimizes the experience for participants and facili-
tator alike. We have made this as efficient, effective, and highly action-
able of a process as possible, and the format and method have been
tried and tested across industries and around the world by thousands of
practitioners.

If you find ways to improve upon our approach, we’d love to hear from you.
We encourage you to adapt the method to best fit your work context, and
“get practical” with us!



Why did you rename the
service blueprint?
“Service” is a narrow word to define what is really a broad system of how
the organization delivers. There are many organizations that are “product”
orgs that can benefit from blueprinting, and also situations where the term
“service” may not apply. You could blueprint the expe-
rience a penguin has in a zoo. Or the experience of a
holiday party. Or the experience of an astronaut flying
                                                                Anything that requires a
to Mars. Would you call those services? Probably not.           complex organizational
But they are definitely experiences that occur over time,       delivery and results
and require a complex organizational delivery in order to       in an “experience” for
make them successful or good.
                                                                someone (or something)
We wanted to use a more general and accurate name for           can be blueprinted.
the method, and believe it should be called an “experi-
ence delivery blueprint,” as the blueprint itself is a visual
representation of how the organization is delivering the experience, and
looks through the lens of the scenario for a particular experience in order
to unpack that operational delivery in the backstage. In short, we refer to it
as an “experience blueprint.”




                                                                       Common blueprinting questions   117
                            How many scenarios do I really
                            need?
                            As we describe in chapter three, you do not need to blueprint every single
                            possible scenario. Let’s use the theme park metaphor to understand this.
                            Imagine a theme park with many different rides. Each ride is like a touch-
                            point in your experience ecosystem. You can imagine how different visitors
                            each have their own unique experience of the theme park, but many of
                            their trips share a lot of the same touchpoints. You likely have popular rides
                            that the majority of visitors experience in their visit, and then you probably
                            have edge cases that are less popular.

                            If you pick a few of the majority scenarios, they will likely cover the popular
                            rides and a bit more. Then, if you pick a couple edge case scenarios, you
                            will get a view into the less common experiences. To get the coverage of
                            80% of the park, you only need a handful of scenarios. So, think of a bell
                            curve where the majority of your customer experiences fall in the middle
                            68%—pick a few scenarios that cover the majority, and then pick a couple
                            edge cases to help round it out.




118   Your Guide to Blueprinting the Practical Way
Can I use the blueprint if I am a
UX or product designer?
Yes, the Practical Blueprint, both current- and future-state, are excellent
tools for UX and product designers, or really anyone who has a hand in
seeing the end-to-end, surface-to-core view of what the blueprint is meant
to visualize and represent.

As a UX or product designer, you might want to bring out your blueprinting
toolkit when you are sensing that the organization is struggling to oper-
ationalize the delivery of a design effectively or efficiently. It can also be
a great tool for you to present your design concept in a way that shows
you understand (or want to better understand) how the design relies on
backstage organizational delivery, and that you (designer) want to have a
constructive, collaborative conversation with your business counterparts in
order to produce an even better holistic experience delivery.


A note to the UX and Product Designers
If you consider yourself in a role that would be more easily described as
UX or Product Design, all the tenets and practices of both current and
future-state blueprinting apply to your work! You may not feel like you have
that strategic seat at the table… in fact, you may feel like you’re sitting at
the kid’s table while all the adults have dinner without you!

Fear not: both of us authors spent a great many years in UX and Product
design, and most of the biggest wins, learnings, and evolution of our own
careers happened before we made any sort of switch away from primarily
focusing on UX and Product Design. In fact, learning to use these blue-
printing methods, how to facilitate, how to synthesize, and how to socialize
the output is what elevated our careers more than anything else.

Take what is in this book and apply it to your UX and Product Design proj-
ects. We’ve applied both current and future-state blueprinting to things
that may feel small, but are deceptively complex. From digital product
onboarding, to customer account management and support, to first-time
use experiences, and even search and browse experiences, the principles
all apply just the same.


                                                                         Common blueprinting questions   119
                            Remember, it’s not the scope of the project that makes blueprinting effec-
                            tive, it’s the proper scoping of the scenario and the efficacy of your blue-
                            printing process. You’ll never be told you lack an understanding of how
                            your design connects to the business after doing this! So go forth and blue-
                            print, UXers!



                            Can I use the blueprint if I am
                            (insert your role here)?
                            If you’re asking, the answer is yes.

                            Let us set the record straight: the blueprint format we’ve evolved is
                            good for ANYONE in any position. If you see the potential value of blue-
                            printing as addressing the gaps in your organization’s understanding and
                            cross-functional collaboration, you can organize and facilitate a blueprinting
                            effort. You don’t have to be a designer, or a service designer, or even in a
                            position of great authority in your organization to do blueprinting.

                            While the original audience was product and service designers, since
                            publishing the first materials in 2015, we’ve had people use our practical
                            blueprinting format in positions that have nothing to do with the traditional
                            scope of “design and product.” The method and format has been used
                            by people in organizations such as mortgage operations for banks, logis-
                            tics for hospital procedures, government agency applications at state and
                            federal levels, non-profits… the list goes on.

                            Most of these people had no connection to the typical path that leads one
                            to “design thinking” and the typical methods of product innovation that
                            Silicon Valley has made so mainstream. The only thing they all share in
                            common—us and you and everyone—is the ability to take a step back and
                            look at the macro view and realize that tackling complex systems requires
                            a better tool, and that’s what the Practical Experience Blueprint is.




120   Your Guide to Blueprinting the Practical Way
Making a blueprint a living
document
Some teams want to make their blueprint a living document, and this may
be more possible using dynamic tools—like purpose-built boutique tools
made for the format, or tools that have integrations between data in the
blueprint and other common tools used in the workplace for communica-
tion or collaboration.

However, you should note that a current-state blue-
print is a snapshot of a point in time. It will go out of   A current-state blueprint
date as the experience and business change natu-
                                                            is a point-in-time snapshot
rally over time and as you implement improvements
uncovered during blueprinting. You can at future
                                                            of the organization.
points review and refresh the current-state map,
however, the point of the map is to identify things to fix and move toward
fixing those things that will then make your map out of date. So, it may not
be realistic to expect that a current-state map stays accurate as it’s really
a vehicle for getting to an improved experience delivery. You would need
rigorous team processes and roles to ensure that maps are kept up-to-
date, and an owner in charge of this as well as a team culture and values to
reinforce the value of keeping it up-to-date.

Now, a future-state blueprint is a map of what to build. When you start to
build it, however, the design is likely to change. It may be useful then to
make sure someone owns the responsibility to ensure that changes get
fed back into the blueprint so that it accurately reflects the decisions that
have been made—think of this as a project manager role or an implemen-
tation owner role. This might be you!




                                                                        Common blueprinting questions   121
                            Are there other ways to modify
                            the blueprint format?
                            Sometimes the practical blueprinting format and method may not be
                            the most “practical” for your particular work context. We have ourselves
                            adapted our own methodology to better fit a unique project or team’s
                            needs.

                            Sometimes it can be helpful to separate the blueprint into swimlanes again
                            (vs. stacking the layers underneath the step). While you lose the “heat
                            map” benefit of the map, sometimes this helps keep the team more orga-
                            nized, and can help team members to participate more actively in adding
                            stickies themselves (vs. you or the notetaker capturing the information
                            into the blueprint format). If doing an in-person, paper-driven blueprint, the
                            swimlanes actually can help to hold space for multiple stickies in each step
                            so that you don’t have to keep moving the stickies down or over.

                                                                                                Phases
                                                     The Scenario
                                                                       

                                                                                                     Steps
        Step



      Touchpoint
                                                                                                 Usually there is only one
                                                                                                 touchpoint per step, so
                                                                                                 you can leave this as is.
        Roles



                                                                                                 Layers in swimlanes can
      Technology                                                                                 be easier if doing physical
                                                                                                 blueprinting (so you don't
                                                                                                 have to move stickies
                                                                                                 around if you want to add
                                                                                                 more layers), and can also
        Policy
                                                                                                 make it easier for group
                                                                                                 members to go head's-
                                                                                                 down in the digital
                                                                                                 whiteboard to add
        etc.                                            ...
                                                                                                 stickies themselves.



                            Sometimes, if your team needs to stay focused at a higher level about a
                            particular experience, you can adapt the format to focus more at the phase
                            level to begin to unpack the backstage and brainstorm opportunities. This
                            can be a more simple and helpful format to use if you only have a short
                            time and a lot to cover, and many stakeholders to engage in a real-time
                            workshop setting. We suggest in this situation to go one phase at a time,


122   Your Guide to Blueprinting the Practical Way
                  and have your participants go heads down to add stickies to each swim-
                  lane in that phase, take a few minutes to review each, and then move to
                  the next phase. In this way, you can capture a lot of data very quickly with
                  a large group. You will, however, have to do cleanup later to group and pull
                  out unique items, and may want to spend time following up with key stake-
                  holder to map the layers’ data to the step (if you need that detail). However,
                  you can get almost a similar benefit doing it at this level without mapping to
                  the unique step in some cases.

                          Phase one                        Phase two                            Phase three




  Step



Touchpoint




  Roles                                                                                                                         Capturing the layers by
                                                                                                                                phase can be easier if
                                                                                                                                you are trying to get a
                                                                                                                                larger group to add their
Technology
                                                                                                                                info to the blueprint in a
                                                                                                                                workshop setting. You will
                                                                                                                                have to do some clean up
                                                                                                                                and a second pass to
  Policy                                                                                                                        map the layers to steps if
                                                                                                                                you need that level of
                                                                                                                                detail.

  etc.                                                            ...

             To simplify the blueprint, but still get effective output, just focus on the core component layers (touchpoint,
             technology, roles, policies, processes), and then add critical moments and opportunities (current-state)
             or potential pitfalls (future-state).



                  What you might lose in this adaptation of the method is the actual
                  end-to-end understanding of the steps of the scenario, and the particular
                  details of the backstage. You will capture general, high level insights about
                  roles, systems, processes, policies, and opportunities for improvement, but
                  you might miss some of the nuance and tactical fixes.




                                                                                                                        Common blueprinting questions        123
                            Is a blueprint a pretty map I
                            can show to stakeholders?
                            Not really. Yes, it is a map, but it is more functional than pretty, and the time
                            you spend to make it pretty may not be worth it. However, it is a map that
                            contains a lot of information that can be pulled out and visualized in other
                            ways. Think of it as a source of truth for detailed information that can be
                            referenced.

                            Always remember: the blueprint is a process for how to get to the ultimate
                            destination—action! A blueprint’s core purpose is to let you tease out the
                            opportunities, critical moments, and ideas, but it is none of those things
                            itself! Like the scaffolding used to build the Eiffel Tower, once you’re done
                            building, remove it and let the monument to your work live on. For you, the
                            Eiffel Tower is the output of your synthesis—the action plan.

                            Functionally, the visual can act like a heat map, especially for current-state,
                            where you can visually see and spot at a high level where the more compli-
                            cated or heavy areas are. This can have a great impact on stakeholders as
                            you are reviewing the outputs of blueprinting.

                            Think about your narrative and what you are trying to share, convince, or
                            educate your stakeholders about, and then adapt the information from the
                            blueprint to the format that will be most useful for doing that.

                            See the interlude chapter of photos and screenshots of real-world blue-
                            prints to see the breadth of how final products can look! Don’t be afraid to
                            adapt the format to your needs!




124   Your Guide to Blueprinting the Practical Way
How do I get my organization
to let me blueprint?
Blueprinting is a tool that takes the macro into account and exposes it like
never before. This is good, since it gives you a massive amount of insight
into your organization, crossing silos, teams, channels, and touchpoints.

However, this introduces a factor that typically isn’t as relevant with most
innovation and design frameworks: the required amount of air-cover and
champions at the top. One of the biggest considerations on how much
impact and success a blueprinting effort can have is directly proportional
to the level and depth of executive sponsorship. The insights, breakdowns,
or new designs that the blueprint—both current and future-state—reveals
are almost never simple, and almost never localized. The enduring solu-
tions are often on a macro scale and need the support of top-down leader-
ship to influence the various silo, team, or touchpoint owners that typically
operate within their own sandboxes.

The blueprint doesn’t just codify and externalize the end-to-end, surface-
to-core of a single area. If you look at a typical blueprint and the internal
teams and owners it crosses, often you’ll find that the only common owner
of the entire thing are at the business-unit or VP level, or if the blueprint is
scoped small enough, Director level.

This means that gaining the blessing, approval, and support of the leaders
who have a stake in the macro view is essential. They have a unique
ownership, and accountability, for things that cross silos, teams, touch-
points, in ways that the individual focus of the teams themself do not.

If you need a metaphor, it’s like a bunch of city mayors trying to create an
interstate freeway system. All the good intent and due-diligence of plan-
ning this freeway system won’t get far if those city mayors don’t have the
support of the state governors or federal representatives. Even if those
city mayors are going to do all the work coordinating and connecting their
cities, they MUST have that support from the top.

Which invites the question: why don’t more of these leaders at the top
require and request blueprints? After reading this book, they will!
Conclusion
Blueprinting is one of the fastest, most effective ways to be customer-cen-
tric and look through the lens of the experience into the nuts and bolts of
your organization and how it delivers (or might deliver). By narrowing in
on your most critical scenarios, blueprinting allows you to see end-to-end
and surface-to-core. This enables you to collect valuable insights across
multiple scenarios and identify strategic themes and tactical fixes, or design
a brand new way to deliver an experience. It lets you take meaningful,
durable action, transforming your customer’s experience!

There are many journeys and many customers, but there’s only one of
your business, only one collection of systems, policies, processes, and
actors that make up what you offer. That is what the blueprint uncovers;
the backstage that is used over and over again by the customers. We map
customer experiences all the time, but rarely do we take the time to map
out and document our own businesses.


                                                                                 Conclusion   127
                            An experience is only as cohesive as the teams that produce it, and any
                            attempt to make meaningful changes to an experience requires a deep
                            understanding of the makeup of the organization that builds the stage for
                            that experience.

                            You now have everything you need to go through a practical blueprinting
                            project lifecycle, from figuring out what to blueprint, all the way to finding
                            strategic themes and implementing tactical fixes or creating an actionable
                            implementation plan for your new design. The practical blueprint lets you
                            rally your peers around an opportunity space, diagnose tough problems,
                            understand and see the truly holistic view, and take meaningful action.

                            Blueprinting can give you actionable insights that influence the strategic
                            direction of your organization, as well as the day-to-day small stuff. But it
                            takes your passion for a more holistic front and backstage mindset to culti-
                            vate lasting change in the way your organization approaches designing
                            experiences.

                            We hope you’re able to take what you’ve learned from this guide and apply
                            it to your own organization. Please get in touch, and let us know how it
                            went! We are so excited to hear from you and learn about how you are
                            using this practical approach to blueprinting!

                            Visit www.practicalbydesign.co to download templates, take our current
                            and future-state blueprinting online courses, and stay connected as we
                            continue to make design, strategy, and innovation methods more practical,
                            by design.

                            Happy blueprinting!

                            —Megan & Erik




128   Your Guide to Blueprinting the Practical Way
Leave us a review!
If you liked the book, the best way to show us is with a review on
Amazon and Goodreads!

The easiest way to do this is to go to:

pbd.pub/reviews
and you’ll find links to the Amazon product page, and our entry on
Goodreads, as well as a link you can share on social media to help
other people find the book!




                                                                     Conclusion   129
Glossary
Key terms
Actor
The word “actor” is often used in service design to refer to the staff roles
(backstage people) who are involved in service delivery. These roles are
“performing” service for the customer, and are thus often referred to as
“actors.”


Channel
A specific medium in which interactions take place, such as: physical mailer,
email, social media, phone, web.


End-to-End
The breadth across time of a scenario, showing the start all the way to the
end of the scenario and everything that takes place in between. The lens
through which you view the backstage.


Experience
The story through time of what a customer (or other end recipient or user)
goes through when traversing a service or product offering.


Experience Lifecycle
A standard set of phases that all experiences go through, including:
unaware → aware → contract/buy → first time use → normal use → reconsider
→ leave. This lifecycle can be genericized and applied to all experiences of
a service or product offering.


                                                                                Glossary   131
                            Map
                            A visual diagram representation of information. Mapping is a way to make
                            visual the evidence, and externalize information so that a group of stake-
                            holders can build shared understanding and anchor in a shared mental
                            model.


                            Product
                            A static product that is acquired by a customer to be used to meet a
                            customer need (e.g. a hammer, a version of software).


                            Scenario
                            A linear use case that plays out over time that involves your customer’s
                            experience (“visible” steps) combined with your organization’s backstage
                            (“hidden” steps).


                            Service
                            A specific offering that your organization produces that acts in service to
                            the customer. Services provide or perform, and engage the customer in a
                            relationship over time. The service comprises all the people, processes,
                            systems, policies, and touchpoints that cross the experience lifecycle.


                            Surface-to-Core
                            The depth of underlying support roles, touchpoints, systems, processes,
                            and policies that create the end-to-end surface.


                            Touchpoint
                            A point of interaction between the customer and the business. A touch-
                            point exists in a channel, and is often a “product” that is designed. Example
                            touchpoints: webpage, app, phone conversation, help ticket, billing state-
                            ment, email, physical store, flyer, advertisement.




132   Your Guide to Blueprinting the Practical Way
Methods
Blueprint
A blueprint is a map that exposes the detailed components of how an
experience is delivered—the people, processes, systems, policies, and
touchpoints that set the stage for the customer experience.


Flow Chart
A flow chart is often used to map an experience path including the various
branching as a customer navigates the touchpoints of an experience. Task
flows are often at a bit more of a detailed level than the steps of a blue-
print, and do not cover any of the backstage of blueprinting or even the
emotional aspects covered in journey mapping.


Journey Map
A journey map is an iconic or representative map of a linear customer
experience as a journey showing how they experience your business. This
only shows the customer point of view, and doesn’t go into the backstage
of the business or how it delivers or hidden steps. A journey map covers
the doing, thinking, feeling and touchpoints of a customer experience.


Process Map
A process map is a flow chart showing end to end of a business process
(not customer centric) and shows the branches and variations, identifying
operators, systems, and other process data. A blueprint may overlap with
some steps of a process map, however, we blueprint a unique concrete
scenario end-to-end, and stay customer-centric and do not look at all the
branches, variations, and data of a process. Instead, blueprinting will result
in the start of a process inventory of sorts—identifying a set of processes
that are essential to the experience.




                                                                                 Glossary   133
About the Authors
We (Erik and Megan!) have over 40 years experience in combined lead-
ership in design, innovation, and product strategy. We have worked for
large enterprises, small startups, and consulted with companies across the
Global 2000. Our onlines courses, articles, templates, and learning content
have been viewed and used by hundreds of thousands, across every busi-
ness sector and level of government worldwide!

Read more and connect with us, we’re always looking for new people and
organizations to collaborate with and support!

Visit https://www.practicalbydesign.co/about-us to learn more and
contact us today!




Megan Erin Miller                      Erik Flowers

With over 15 years of design and       Erik is a 24 year veteran of working
leadership experience, Megan prac- with technology and design to make
tices and leads teams in a rigorous,   new, novel and interesting things.
data and empathy-driven design         Creative productivity with like-
practice. She is passionate about      minded people is his obsession;
talent development, and chases her     he is driven to engage, entertain,
purpose to connect, inspire, ignite,   and educate people with works of
and empower others.                    meaning and merit.
