Design Research
for Change
Symposium papers presented at the Design Museum 11-12 December 2019
Paul A. Rodgers (Editor)




                                                                      1
                                                                   Design
                                                                Research
                                                              For Change
                                                                    2019
ISBN 978-1-86220-369-3

Edited by Paul A. Rodgers

Designed by Euan Winton

Published by
Lancaster University
Bailrigg
Lancaster
LA1 4YW
UK

To visit the Design Research for Change project website,
go to: www.designresearchforchange.co.uk
All rights reserved. The rights of Rodgers to be identified
as editor of this work has been asserted in accordance
with the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
Typeface: Avenir. Printed in an edition of 1000.

2                                                                           3
                                                  Foreword
    The breadth of topics covered at this Symposium is proof, if proof were
    needed, of the enormous value of design research. In areas that range
    from the future of urban living to justice systems and neuroscience,
    design research is providing the frameworks and methodologies to
    answer questions which span disciplinary and conceptual boundaries; in
    an era of ever greater interdisciplinarity, design research is, once again,
    ahead of the curve. It is for this reason that the Arts and Humanities
    Research Council is delighted to support UK and international Design
    research, whether through the Priority Area Leadership Fellowship, to
    which we have just awarded follow-on funding, or through our open call
    research portfolios, or through other channels. Design has long been
    a discipline on which we collaborate with our sibling councils at UKRI,
    and it features strongly among the Knowledge Transfer Partnerships we
    sponsor.

    What we mean by “design” and “design research” is ever-changing,
    however, and it is right that the AHRC, and UKRI at large, keeps a close
    eye on those changes and responds to them in a way that allows the very
    best of innovative and transformative research to flourish. The impacts
    of that research – academic, economic and social – are enormously
    significant not only in and of themselves, but also in demonstrating
    the value of the field, and therefore the importance of the robust and
    ongoing public funding it richly deserves.

    Professor Edward Harcourt
    Director of Research, Strategy and Innovation
    Arts and Humanities Research Council




4                                                                                 5
                                                                             Designing a sensibility for sustainable clothing (S4S):                  151
                                                                             Affective activism
                                                                             Fiona Hackney, Clare Saunders, Joanie Willett and Katie Hill

                                                                             So, what do you do? The role of design research in innovation for        169
                                                                             worklife inclusion
                                                                             Lise Amy Hansen

                                                                             The digitisation of cordillera weaving: Designing a new oral tradition   185
                                                                             Rachel Kelly

                                                                             Design research for educational change: Methodologies for                209


                                            Contents
                                                                             exploring the future of learning
                                                                             Michael Kerres and Barbara Getto

                                                                             The ripple effects of social design                                      223
                                                                             Eva Knutz and Thomas Markussen
Introduction                                                           8
Paul A. Rodgers                                                              Redesigning design for culture change: Theory in the Anthropocene        243
                                                                             Ann Light
Strange encounters: A series of posters investigating the hybrid       15
embodiment of Indo-Canadian identity                                         Metaphors and imaginaries in design research for change              257
Krishna Balakrishnan                                                         Dan Lockton, Michelle Chou, Aadya Krishnaprasad, Deepika Dixit,
                                                                             Stefania La Vattiata, Jisoo Shon, Matt Geiger and Tammar Zea-Wolfson
Over the emptiness: Interpretations and expression of the term in      37
the spaces of disused cinemas in Milan                                       Creative interventions in the juvenile justice system of India: A        275
Ambra Borin and Laura Galluzzo                                               systemic inquiry
                                                                             Aishwarya S. Narvekar, Aishwarya Rane, Kamal and Pankaj Yadav
Tweaking retirement-living: Introducing design thinking and coffee     59
bars to shared lounges                                                       Material design innovation: Fish leather, a new environmentally-         293
Sam Clark                                                                    friendly material
                                                                             Elisa Palomino and Gustavo Adrian Defeo
Advancing sustainability at universities through design                79
thinking education                                                           Wearing Your recovery: 3.0
Paul C. Endrejat, Amelie V. Güntner, Elena Stasewitsch, Pascal Abel,         Laura Salisbury, Chris McGinley and Rama Gheerawo
Simone Kauffeld, and Susanne Robra-Bissantz
                                                                             The Fair Energy Mark in the making: Framing a citizen-led                311
Design meets neuroscience: Future directions for developing and        93    campaign by participatory design
implementing design probes                                                   Laura Santamaria                                                         337
Melanie Flory and Ninela Ivanova
                                                                             Why knitting now? Textile design research as a driver for                355
                                                                             educational change
The ontological nature of design: Prospecting new futures through      111
                                                                             Jane Scott, Elizabeth Gaston and Zoe Dennington
probabilistic knowledge
Fernando Galdon and Ashley Hall
                                                                             Intervention without imperialism: An equitable approach to               373
                                                                             design research
The future of seafaring: Designing an on-board user-Interface to       129
                                                                             Nneka Sobers
predict engine faults on marine vessels
Simone Gumtau
                                                                             Material reality to materiality: Ocean plastic and design research       395
                                                                             Katharina Vones and Ian Lambert
6                                                                                                                                                           7
                                                                           The twenty papers in this Design Research for Change (DR4C)
                                                                           book examine this “social turn” in design in detail and explore how
                                                                           contemporary forms of design research are increasingly involved in a
                                                                           range of social, cultural, economic, environmental and political action.
                                                                           The research included in this book highlights a variety of significant
                                                                           roles that design researchers play in some of the most challenging
                                                                           issues we face, both in the UK and globally.

                                                                           Narvekar et al’s paper “Creative Interventions in the Juvenile Justice
                                                                           System of India: A Systemic Inquiry” illustrates how design and
                                                                           gamification can be used to enact change in the juvenile justice system
                                                                           in India. Borin and Galluzzo in their paper, “Over the Emptiness:


                                 Introduction
                                                                           Interpretations and Expression of the Term in the Spaces of Disused
                                                                           Cinemas in Milan”, analyse and investigate new possible forms and
                                                                           uses for empty cinema spaces in Milan.

                                                                           Light’s paper, “Redesigning Design for Culture Change: Theory in
A quick search of the word “design” on Google today (22 October            the Anthropocene”, argues that design research needs to learn from
2019) returns over 25,000,000,000 results. These results include design    cultural theory that positions culture as evolving and performative to
organisations, design degrees, design news, ideas about design,            ensure that design, which is low on theory of transformation, can be
design jobs, design media, and links to a variety of design tools and      (re)designed to enact real culture change. In an educational context,
processes. Similarly, today there are many different designers working     Kerres and Getto’s paper “Design Research for Educational Change:
across different disciplines, with different attitudes, different goals,   Methodologies for Exploring the Future of Learning” describes the
different agendas, different ways of working, different ways of doing      development of a meta-project, based on a network of several university
research, producing different outputs that embody different values,        and national institutes, devoted to the development of a methodology
engagement, and impact. Perhaps, however, the connection between           of design-based research with a focus on change projects, design-
all of these diverse design activities is the iterative development of     based approaches and the analyses of success factors for change.
products, services, systems, experiences, spaces, and other designed
stuff in order to improve the human experience. In other words, using      In “Metaphors and Imaginaries in Design Research for Change”,
the power of human creativity to improve humanity.                         Lockton et al discuss how design methods (metaphors, mental
                                                                           imagery, and other forms of imaginaries) can be used more effectively
Today, with its application across a wide range of different disciplines   to influence how people act and make sense of the world and deal
and fields, design is being used to help address significant, complex,     with large-scale challenges in health, environment, politics, and social
and global issues ranging from antimicrobial resistance to mobility,       contexts. Palomino and Defeo’s paper “Material Design Innovation:
from healthy ageing to migration, and the development of more              Fish Leather, a New Environmentally-Friendly Material” reports on a
sustainable materials and processes to creating policy and governance      collaborative project between the Icelandic tannery Atlantic Leather
at local, regional and national levels. And with its inherent agility      and the Italian analytical laboratory Ars Tinctoria connecting fashion
and applicability, design helps shape the scientific and technological     designers, scientists and leather technicians from the UK, Italy, and
advances which are transforming the world around us.                       Iceland to advance material innovation by using new technology (water-
                                                                           based ink digital printing methods) on fish leather as an alternative to
In recent years, design research has witnessed a clear “social turn”       conventional leather to encourage more sustainable fashion practices.
where researchers have looked to make change in more socially-
focused contexts as opposed to wholly commercial realms. This “social      “The Ripple Effects of Social Design - A Model to support New Cultures
turn” has encompassed a range of activities and interventions that         of Evaluation in Design Research” by Eva Knutz and Thomas Markussen
constitute a more “socially-driven” form of design, which suggests that    articulates a need for developing an evaluation culture that is primarily
researchers and practitioners from non-design disciplines are working in   concerned with design outcomes. They use a social design case (a
close collaboration with design researchers with the ambition to realise   game-based intervention designed for family visits in maximum-security
change in social, cultural, economic, and environmental situations.        prisons) to identify ripple effects leading to three types of value - social
                                                                           value, demand value, and research value. Hackney et al present their
                                                                           work entitled “Designing a Sensibility for Sustainable Clothing (S4S):
8                                                                                                                                                         9
Affective Activism” that combines arts with social science research           Ivanova and Flory in their paper entitled “Design meets Neuroscience:
methods to investigate how creative activities might shape a sensibility      Future Directions for Developing and Implementing Design Probes”
for sustainable clothing and promote pro-environmental behaviour              outline recent advances in neuro-technologies, and the pivotal role user
change through making fibre, using waste fabric and modifying clothes.        experience design might play across a wide range of analogue and
                                                                              digital applications at individual, community, and global level ranging
Scott et al’s paper “Why Knitting Now? Textile Design Research as a           from learning and education interventions to innovation of large-
Driver for Educational Change” reports on work in collaboration with          scale healthcare options. Nneka Sobers’ paper “Intervention without
the Crafts Council (UK) and sixteen schools across Yorkshire that has         Imperialism: An Equitable Approach to Design Research” examines
used knitting as a tool for designing and making across a variety of          a hybridized and anti-exploitative design research methodology that
scales to reposition textiles as a vehicle to respond to global challenges    is unpacked through a case study of a community in Accra, Ghana.
such as the environmental problems of textile colouration. Katharina          Emphasising equity, self-determination, deep dialogue, and context-
Vones and Ian Lambert’s paper “Material Reality to Materiality: Ocean         sensitivity, the design research presented in the paper resulted in the
Plastic and Design Research” brings together material exploration and         co-creation of a grassroots waste management system that illustrates
designer-maker education methods to bear on a major environmental             notions of the role and mechanics of dismantling systems of oppression
issue with huge public interest through a critically and scientifically       as a socially-conscious designer.
engaged process, rooted in places and communities affected by
complex and significant environmental issues.                                 Endrejat et al’s paper “Advancing Sustainability at Universities through
                                                                              Design Thinking Education”, presents a case study describing how a
In “Strange Encounters: A Series of Posters Investigating the Hybrid          team of students addressed the problem of disposable cups usage
Embodiment of Indo-Canadian Identity”, Krishna Balakrishnan’s paper           within a university (TU Braunschweig) using design thinking methods to
acknowledges the many forms of otherness that exist from differences          reduce the usage of single-use cups. Rachel Kelly’s paper “The Voices
in subjectivity, gender, race, class, temporal and spatial geographic         of the Cordillera: Digitising an Oral Tradition” describes a collaborative
location and dislocation to produce a series of visual artefacts that         project between the Philippines-based CordiTex project and Manchester
discuss hybrid embodiments of Indo-Canadian identity. Salisbury et            School of Art to support the future digitization of indigenous weaving
al present ongoing research that explores how design, in the form of          traditions within the Cordillera region of the Northern Philippines.
smart textiles, can aid upper limb rehabilitation and consider further        The paper includes the development of a Learning Framework and
the person’s extended emotional needs through the considered                  Toolkit to support the preservation of an oral-based weaving tradition
implications of use of types of tools and approaches within the highly        and to develop interventions for creative practice and knowledge-
diverse lifestyles of individuals who have suffered a stroke in their paper   based change. The paper highlights the voice of oral craft traditions
entitled “Wearing Your Recovery: 3.0”.                                        and describes the relationships between different voices which can be
                                                                              heard within authored works such as hand-woven textiles.
“The Fair Energy Mark in the Making: Framing a Citizen-led Campaign
by Participatory Design” by Laura Santamaria presents a design                In “Tweaking Retirement-Living: Introducing Design Thinking & Coffee
intervention that explored citizen empowerment in the context of              Bars to Shared Lounges”, Sam Clark describes research that aims to
the Fair Energy Mark campaign - a citizen-led action aimed to raise           explore what the homes of older people could look like in the future.
practice standards and address power imbalances in the energy supply          This research has been undertaken at a time when there exists a major
sector. By integrating design and communicative action theories with          societal challenge of housing a ‘super-aged’ UK population, and the
participatory design and community organising methodologies the               particular needs and aspirations of active third-agers. Clark’s research
work highlights opportunities to amplify the impact of design research        advances ‘designerly’ modes of inquiry, resulting in design-relevant
for social change. Lise Amy Hansen’s paper “So, What Do You Do? The           feedback for those involved in the production of retirement-living
Role of Design Research for Innovation towards Work-life Inclusion”           environments and how housing providers can use this information
reports on the roles design research has played in a large innovation         to develop more appealing options. Simone Gumtau’s paper “The
project in Norway – InnArbeid - where technology and services are             Future of Seafaring: What Can Design Add? Designing an On-board
developed for social change. In particular, the roles that design research    User-interface to Predict Engine faults on Marine Vessels, Lowering
has played in teasing out novel areas of opportunity for creating and         Fuel Costs and Emissions” describes a collaborative project between
in particular co-creating technology-supported services that support          a communication designer, data scientists, and engineers at the
work-life inclusion of young people with developmental, intellectual          University of Portsmouth working with a consortium of companies in
disabilities (ID).                                                            the marine industry around the Solent in the South East of England.
                                                                              The aims of the project is to add economic and environmental value to
                                                                              marine engineering services in order to retain market competitiveness,
10                                                                                                                                                         11
to comply with international standards to reduce fuel consumption            Further, more broadly and looking to the future we asked authors to
and emission through innovation, and also to provide a better user           consider the following:
experience through design.
                                                                             What should design research change now?
This rich set of papers are the end result of a lengthy process that began   Can design research really change anything?
with an amazing response to the call-for-papers for the Design Research      What will you do to make change?
for Change (DR4C) symposium held at the Design Museum, London
on Wednesday 11 and Thursday 12 December 2019. We received 62                In what ways do you envision the impact of such change to be evaluated?
papers from researchers based in countries all over the world including
Australia, USA, India, China, Sweden, Germany, Italy, Norway, Denmark,       Given the reach and interdisciplinary nature of many forms of
Israel, Greece, Turkey and the UK. After a thorough review process,          contemporary design research it is anticipated that the rich mix of
twenty papers were accepted for this book and presentation in a single-      papers in this book that cross disciplinary, methodological, geographical
track session over the course of the two days at the Design Museum,          and conceptual boundaries highlights the wide-ranging social, cultural
London.                                                                      and economic impact of emerging forms of design research. This book
                                                                             will be of interest to practitioners and researchers in a wide range
The Design Research for Change (DR4C) symposium and subsequent               of disciplines. This will not only include design researchers, design
book are both much-needed, timely, and significant. The papers in this       practitioners, and design academics but the book will be of significant
book address one or more broad and challenging themes highlighted            interest to researchers and practitioners in other areas including (but
in the original call-for-papers. We were interested to hear and see how      not limited to) education, healthcare, government, biotechnology,
design researchers working with others are making and contributing to        engineering, management, computing, and business.
change in areas such as energy and the environment, education, public
services, health and social care. The call-for-papers was intended to        Professor Paul A. Rodgers
be inclusive (not exhaustive) and contributions were encouraged that         AHRC Design Leadership Fellow
challenged these themes and others.                                          Imagination, Lancaster University

We invited authors to submit high-quality, previously unpublished,
original contributions that explored one or more of the DR4C symposium
themes. We asked authors to consider critically a number of questions
including:

What they (as design researchers) are changing and why?
What difference(s) their design research is making?
Who decides what to change?
Who decides/evaluates if this change is “positive” or “good” or
“enough”?

What impact has your change delivered and at what cost?
Also, we asked authors to consider how their design research addresses
one or more of the following questions:

What have you tried to change through your design research?
Who has activated the change and who has been affected by that
change?
What evidence do you have for the change that you claim?
When has your design research brought about positive change and
when has it been detrimental?




12                                                                                                                                                       13
     Strange encounters:
      A series of posters
         investigating the
     hybrid embodiment
        of Indo-Canadian
                  identity
                  Krishna Balakrishnan
14                                  15
                      Abstract
                      Acknowledging the many forms of “otherness” that emerge from
                      differences in subjectivity, gender, race, class, temporal and spatial
                      geographic location and dislocation has become greater interest in
                      current time. This has also become a topic of interest among graphic
                      designers as they explore design’s relationship with culture. This
                      thesis explores the use of graphic design to produce visual artefacts
     Snow White       that discuss hybrid embodiment of Indo-Canadian identity. Cultural
     and Sri Durga,   identities are represented as competing against one another, which
     digital col-
                      results in recognizing one another as strangers. Multiculturalism and
     lage, 44 x 62
     in, February
                      the migrant perspective are always constructed by proximity between
     2015.            strangers. Using hybridity, Homi Bhabha’s (1994) concept of a “third
                      space” identifies a metaphor for the space in which cultures meet.
                      Where communication, negotiation, and translation bridge societies,
                      a new space emerges. This thesis employs the interventions of “the
                      third space” to negotiate a meeting space with strangers. The project
                      prepared during this thesis (2015), The Avatars, digital montage of
                      Hindu Gods, Goddesses, comic-book superheroes, Disney princesses,
                      and hybrid prints produced at Belgium’s Frans Masereel Centrum
                      (2016), represents an alternative way of seeing migrant perceptions of
                      displacement, temporality and belonging.

                      Introduction
                      “Strange Encounters,” examines the relationship between graphic
                      design and proximity between strangers. The concept of “strange
                      encounters” denotes the relationship between strangers, embodiment
                      and community (Ahmed, 2000). The purpose of this thesis is to explore
                      graphic design in order to produce visual artefacts that discuss hybrid
                      embodiment of Indo-Canadian identity (Navar, 2004). By articulating
                      and enunciating cultural hybridity, this project aims to comprehend
                      the rhetoric of the evolving cultural identities of multiculturalism and
                      migrant experiences.

                      The politics of cultural identity is constantly debated, and cultural
                      identification is a factor of representation. In his article “In and Around:
                      Culture of Design and Design of Cultures Part I,” Andrew Blauvelt
                      cites French psychoanalyst Jacques Lacan who states that images and
                      symbols for representational identification cannot be isolated from
                      images and symbols of the represented identity (Blauvelt, 1994). The
                      ways in which culture is represented conditions how it is perceived.
                      This dilemma of cultural displacement is a result of contestation that
                      happens between the predefined cultural identity and that of the new
                      environment.

                      This work is an opportunity to engage critically with complex ideas
                      of identity through the practice of graphic design. If cultural identity
                      is a form of representation, how can graphic design contemplate its
                      role in contributing to cultural identity? How can one recognize the
                      importance of cultural motifs, patterns, images and icons of a particular

16                                                                                                   17
                     culture within a multicultural society? In today’s multicultural society,
                     different heritages are adapted and borrowed. Indian images—of
                     Hindu gods, patterns and Devanagari fonts—have been appropriated
                     in western countries. Transferring visual vernaculars such as artifacts,
                     styles and traditions across cultures requires adaptation to the new
                     environment. How can a graphic designer translate cultural vernacular
                     across many cultures as a way to negotiate representation of a meeting
     Winnie the      space between strangers?
     Pooh and
     Lord Ganesha,   Design’s global engagement continues to focus largely on facilitating
     digital col-
                     the flow of images and consumer goods across continents, without
     lage, 44 x 62
     in, February
                     consideration of larger political and social effects. By communicating
     2015.           with different cultures and subcultures, designers and corporations
                     expand their audience base by marketing messages to a specific
                     regional or ethnic groups. How can graphic design contribute to
                     different ethnic cultures in multiculturalism without being used solely for
                     corporate exploitation? This thesis examines how design, as a medium,
                     attempts to establish relationships with individuals with whom it seeks
                     to collaborate—populations that are culturally others or strangers.

                     The posters series, The Avatars, created by Krishna Balakrishnan are a
                     digital montage of Hindu gods and goddesses, comic-book superheroes
                     and Disney princesses. They are metaphoric representations analogous
                     to the embodiment of Indian-Canadian (Indo-Canadian) identity.
                     The designer attempts to discuss complex ideas of migrant identity,
                     difficulties in translating vernaculars—images and symbols across
                     cultures, and negotiate the representation of a meeting space between
                     strangers. All of these questions highlight postmodernism’s concern for
                     difference, difficulties in communication, and complexities and nuances
                     of interests, cultures, and place.

                     The Concept of Hybridity: Proximity of Strangers
                     The concept of hybridity has been applied to biology, ethnicity, and
                     culture. Hybrid denotes a fusion, a blending of two entities to produce
                     a new original. In biology, the concept denotes an offspring of two
                     animals or plants of different races, breeds, varieties, species, or
                     genera. The extension of hybrid’s definition for use in the social field
                     can be “a person produced by blending of two diverse cultures or
                     traditions.” Canadian immigrants, or children born to immigrant parents
                     may represent these hybrid selves. The mixing of peoples of different
                     origins is as old as the history of humanity, but the term acquired
                     recent relevance in connection to the imperialism and contemporary
                     globalization. As theorist Jan Nederveen Pietrese says “… it is not
                     mixing that is new but the scope and speed of mixing.” (Pietrese, 2009).

                     Cultural hybridity stems from the notion that we must think of cultural
                     identities as based on difference. Being different does not necessarily
                     entail that one is better or superior to the other. Discriminatory and
                     celebratory reactions to difference result from diverse conceptions of

18                                                                                                 19
                      identity (Brah, 1996). The sense of difference challenges notions of fixed
                      binaries, which stabilizes meaning and representation, and shows how
                      meaning is never finished (Hall, 1990). Without relations of difference,
                      no representation could occur. The essentialist position of identity
                      and culture attempts to preserve a homogeneous essence. A non-
                      essentialist attitude is, however, a conception of culture as a continued
                      process and as a heterogeneous combination of discursive practices.
     Snow White       An essentialist concept of culture leads to the creation of social,
     and Sri Durga,   cultural and racial barriers, while the non-essentialist concept allows
     digital col-     for blending and crossings. If cultures have stable, discrete identities,
     lage, 44 x 62
                      then the division between cultures can always become agonistic. Such
     in, February
     2015.            barriers are arbitrary ideological formations: metaphors, discursively
                      constructed. Avtar Brah defines such borders as:

                         Arbitrary dividing lines, that are simultaneously social, cultural
                         and psychic; territories to be patrolled against those whom they
                         construct as outsiders, aliens, the Others: forms of demarcation
                         where the very act of prohibition inscribes transgression; zones
                         where fear of the Other is fear of the self: places where claims to
                         ownership—claims to “mine,” “yours” and “theirs”—are staked
                         out, contested, defined and fought over. (Brah, 1996: 198)

                      Hybridity problematizes boundaries (Bhabha, 1994). The borderline
                      subverts the concept of an essential purity. Hybridity implies “openness,
                      adaptiveness, flexibility, contradiction and irony.” (Stoddard and
                      Cornwell, 1996). Hybridity thus relates to postmodernism, which
                      also employs concepts of “difference, repetition, the simulacrum,
                      and hyper-reality” to destabilize other concepts such as “presence,
                      identity, historical progress, epistemic certainty and the univocity
                      of meaning.” (Aylesworth, 2013). In The Location of Culture, Homi
                      Bhabha’s introduction begins with Heidegger’s definition of a boundary:
                      A boundary is not that at which something stops but, as the Greek
                      recognized, the boundary is that from which something begins its
                      presenting (Bhabha, 1994). A boundary stresses the idea that what
                      exists between settled cultural forms or identities—identities like self
                      and other, stranger and friend—is central to the creation of new cultural
                      meaning. It suggests that the proper location of culture is in-between
                      the overly familiar forms of official culture.

                      Homi Bhabha’s ‘Third Space’: Negotiating the In-between
                      In most of his works, Bhabha considers the interrelations and
                      interdependence between colonizers and colonized. In “The Other
                      Question,” Bhabha proposes the colonial discourse as an apparatus
                      that turns on the recognition and denial of racial/cultural differences
                      (Bhabha, 1994). The objective of colonial discourse, says Bhabha, is to
                      view the colonized as a population of degenerate types on the basis
                      of racial origin, in order to justify conquest and to establish systems
                      of administration and instruction. The social categories exerted on the
                      colonized imprints imaginary conditions that collide with their own,

20                                                                                                 21
                     and displaces the disjunction. This encounter eventually creates a
                     new “hybrid” expression of cultures and of belonging, which in turn
                     challenges the beliefs and experience of the colonizers (Bhabha, 1999).

                     Whereas one theory would give the colonizer dominant power, Bhabha
                     proposes an alternative context to the interaction between colonized
                     and colonizer. Bhabha argues that colonial and postcolonial cultural
     Captain         systems and statements are constructed in a “liminal space,” the “Third
     America and     Space of Enunciation”:
     Lord Krishna,
     digital col-
                        The intervention of the Third Space of enunciation, which makes
     lage, 44 x 62
     in, February       the structure of meaning and reference an ambivalent process,
     2015.              destroys this mirror of representation in which cultural knowledge
                        is customarily revealed as an integrated, open, expanding code.
                        Such an intervention quite properly challenges our sense of the
                        historical identity of culture as a homogenizing unifying force,
                        authenticated by the originally Past, kept alive in the national
                        tradition of the people. (Bhabha, 1994: 54)

                     In an interview titled “The Third Space,” Bhabha explains that “this
                     third space displaces the histories that constitute it, and sets up new
                     structures of authority, new political initiatives, which are inadequately
                     understood through received wisdom.” (Bhabha, 1990). The notion of
                     hybridity concerns the idea that in any particular political struggle, new
                     sites are always opened up. Referring new sites to old principles limits
                     participation of the newness fully, productively, and creatively.

                     Bhabha strongly urges negotiation, for negotiation is what politics
                     entails. Bhabha further states that we negotiate even when we don’t
                     know we are negotiating. We are always negotiating in any situation of
                     political opposition or antagonism. Subversion and transgression are
                     negations. Negotiation is not only a form of compromise or “selling
                     out.” All forms of political activity, especially progressive or radical
                     activity, involve reformations and reformulations. In history, these
                     changes are called “revolutions”: critical moments of reforms and
                     reformulations. Subversion refers to a process by which the values and
                     principles of a system in place, are contradicted or reversed.

                     Visualizing Hybrid Forms of Indo-Canadian Culture
                     The Avatars are a series of hybrid creatures, mongrels, mutations, or
                     combination of strangers, which depict negotiation of their prescribed
                     representation. Their visual representations suggest a sense of
                     transitioning and morphing into singular entities. Though they appear
                     autonomous, they are in fact an amalgamation of what are two or
                     more former entities. What is important in hybridity is not the original
                     moments, but rather amalgam, which emerges from the previous.
                     These avatars are visually recognized as single-bodied creatures yet the
                     visual system of overlapping images suggest translucency when one
                     perceives independent forms in the same place. The use of translucency

22                                                                                                23
                      invites the viewer to read the collaged images; the embodiment of an
                      in-between space. The images’ composition and arrangement also aid
                      in recognizing The Avatars as single-bodied creatures. Images of the
                      former characters are purposely selected in similar dynamic posture and
                      gesture, thus enabling them to become recognized as a single entity.
                      At first glance, the iconic characteristics of The Avatars’ former “original”
                      form are identifiable. The representation of Spiderman’s webs, his hand
     The Little       gestures as he projects his webs are visible. On the same avatar is a
     Mermaid and      shirtless blue body, adorned with brown beads, and long locks of messy
     Sri Saraswari,   hair that extend below the shoulder. In place of a head, where one
     digital col-
                      expects to see the masked face, with curved and repeated lines that
     lage, 44 x 62
     in, February
                      represent a spider web, is a visible blue face. In the areas where the two
     2015.            bodies overlap, translucent fragments of another character are visible.
                      On this avatar’s chest and shoulder, one sees the translucent forms of
                      Spiderman’s costume. On another avatar, the viewer sees Superman’s
                      iconic “S” in the diamond shape on his chest; his red cape, and blue
                      and red costume suggest it is the “man of steel.” On top of Superman’s
                      costume are pearl necklaces, jewels and green silk fabric wrapped
                      around his waist. He has animalistic features—a long tail with a bell
                      attached at the end, and the facial representation of a monkey. These
                      different features are reflective of Hindu God Hanuman’s representation.

                      On one hand, The Avatars make use of comic-book vernacular and
                      children’s cartoon characters from Western pop culture while on the
                      other hand, The Avatars depict Indian Hindu gods and goddesses.
                      These juxtaposing vernaculars from distinct cultural contexts meet in
                      their hybrid embodiment. In this embodiment, the boundaries that
                      contain static identities are dissolved. Attempting to visually read
                      The Avatars forces one to negotiate these juxtaposed identities. The
                      Avatars’ construction asks questions of their configuration: Why are
                      they in this mongrel mutated form? What is their relationship to one
                      another? Cultural identities are represented as competing against one
                      another, and as a result the hybrids are recognized as either contesting
                      or harmonious in their embodiment. Bhabha notes that differences in
                      writing or écriture contribute to the difficulty in cultural enunciation of
                      cultural texts, or systems of meaning (Bhabha, 2006). This difficulty has
                      less to do with what anthropologists describe as varying attitudes to
                      symbolic systems within different cultures than with the structure of
                      symbolic representation. The difficulty in reading the content of the
                      symbol or its “social function,” is due to the structure of symbolization.
                      Bhabha further states that the difference in language is crucial to the
                      production of meaning, and ensures that meaning is never simply
                      formal, technical, and transparent. The difference of cultural symbolism
                      makes the images’ meaning difficult to read if one is not receptive to
                      differences of cultural enunciation.

                      To understand The Avatars, one needs to forgo traditional
                      representations of being an Indian and a Canadian. The Avatars’ bodies
                      are never complete; they are in the process of “becoming” their new
                      embodiment, and “destructing” their former selves. In “Creation of
24                                                                                                    25
                      the Sacred Image: Apotheosis and Destruction in Hinduism,” James J.
                      Preston claims that sacred images in Hinduism are temporal, incomplete,
                      and inadequate as a full expression. The sacred images of Hindu gods
                      are constructed according to systematic rules, and then are infused with
                      sacrality and kept “alive” by highly controlled behaviours intended to
                      retain the “spirit in matter.” (Preston, 1985). The process of constructing
     Spiderman        sacred images, and the process of their destruction, reveals something
     and Lord         intriguing about human religion. The destruction of the sacred image
     Shiva, digital   is as important as its creation; it is a powerful act of imagination that
     collage, 44 x    challenges us to ask why humans must insist that the invisible must
     62 in, Febru-    be made visible. In Darsan: Seeing the Divine Image in India, Diana L.
     ary 2015.        Eck states that Hinduism is an imaginative, “image-making” religious
                      tradition in which the sacred is seen as present in the visible world—
                      the world we see in multiple images and deities, in sacred places, in
                      people, in every locus of Indian life (Eck, 1998). The behaviour Indians
                      exhibit towards sacred images is brought to their immigrant land and
                      changes accordingly upon interactions with new experiences.

                      The superheroes are representations of “godlike” presence in
                      American “material” popular culture. Their images are produced in
                      similar quantity as those of the Hindu gods—in product packaging,
                      films, posters and whatever corporations can exploit in their trademark.
                      Though the superheroes of The Avatars can be perceived as American,
                      they have roots in every country, where, around the turn of the
                      twentieth century, the comic industry expanded from publication
                      newspaper and strips to circulation in collections and serials. Canadian
                      culture, so close in proximity to the United States, is heavily influenced
                      by American superheroes. Today, comic studies have been integrated
                      into many university programs of world literature, and represent a form
                      of storytelling art rooted in trans-cultural imaginations. Superheroes
                      and comic books have become synonymous with the experience of
                      westernization.

                      Flesh of Gods, Flesh of Superheroes: Embodiment of Avatars
                      The graphic narrative of The Avatars present bodies moving through time
                      and “space” (Ryan, 2012) - gods and superheroes, Indian and Western,
                      sacred and popular, high and low, past and present. Considering how
                      the bodies of The Avatars relate to and interact with each other and
                      the world around them shapes the viewer’s perception of time, space
                      and causality. In “Space, Time and Causality in Graphic Narratives:
                      An Embodied Approach,” Karin Kukkonen notes that to some extent,
                      the embodied approach inverts the Kantian perspective that time and
                      space structure human experience, and proposes that these concepts
                      arise as a consequence of readers’ experience (Kukkonen, 2013).
                      The narrative of The Avatars needs to be examined not as objective.
                      Rather, they need to be examined as properties related to the physical
                      resonance of mixing two former bodies into one self. To a large extent,
                      perception is formed by how we view the space around us. Kukkonen
                      points to Alva Noe’s statement that perceiving is an activity of exploring

26                                                                                                  27
                      the image to understand the ways in which composition affects one’s
                      sensory relations to things.

                      Considering the composition of The Avatars’ bodies in relation to one
                      another, readers get a sense of how to perceive the story around them.
                      When the “original” images of represented bodies overlap, The Avatars
                      appear to be harmonious with their two former selves. In contrast,
     Superman         some of The Avatars hint at a contested interaction of former “original”
     and Lord Ha-     images. Though The Avatars are still images, they evoke a sense of
     numan, digital   movement. Motion seems to be transferred from one body to another
     collage, 44 x
                      because of the movement’s spatio-temporal unity, perceiving a causal
     62 in, Febru-
     ary 2015.
                      relationship being established. Spiderman’s legs seem to exert forces of
                      balance, and Lord Shiva (even though sitting crossed-legged) appears
                      to respond to the balancing on one foot. This perception, Kukkonen
                      describes, is part of our “body schema,” that is, the ways in which our
                      bodies shapes our perceptual field, integrates sensory information
                      about our bodies moving through an environment, and information
                      about our posture and movement. Image schemata, like “balance”
                      relates to our immediate bodily experience of the world. When we see
                      a perpendicular composition in an image, with clear horizontal and
                      vertical lines, it relates to our bodily experience of being perpendicular
                      (due to gravity), and we view the body of The Avatars as “balanced.”

                      The medium of collage is also intrinsic to the depiction of hybridity,
                      and represents an alternative way of seeing the Indo-Canadian identity.
                      The Avatars’ incorporate image reproduction of characters that are
                      familiar and different. The gods and superheroes are products of mass
                      printing. One does not need to travel far to encounter Indian gods.
                      Their adoption by global culture has seen Krishna and Kali appear on
                      CD covers, diaries, websites, clothing, and fashion accessories. The
                      superheroes and princess are part of the Hollywood popular material
                      cultures and thus their images are mass reproduced. In this way, the
                      Hindu gods can be seen as popular images that represent India or
                      Indian-ness. The mass consumption and presence of superheroes gives
                      them the power to be seen as gods of Hollywood material culture.
                      Through juxtaposing one element to another, the images make us
                      rethink the significance of all familiar images. The Avatars appear
                      estranged, otherworldly, in-between the possible and the impossible
                      or unlikely, and in a space between real and simulated. By its nature,
                      the collage becomes an interpretation—an expression of opinion.
                      In “Collage Now: The Seamier Side,” Laura Hoptman argues that
                      collages’ interpretative qualities make them “uniquely suited to the job
                      of bringing the world and its cultural efflorescence into close proximity,
                      with no burden to mimic reality or impart truths.” (Hoptman, 2007).
                      The Avatars, in expressing the duality of Indian and Indian-Canadian
                      identity, become a form of strategy, resistance to the world they
                      confront. Difference and similarities of images asks us to imagine them
                      in an alternative way.



28                                                                                                 29
                      Avatars as an alternative way of seeing Indo-Canadian identity
                      The Avatars have a sense of originality. The meaning of the original
                      work no longer exists in what it says uniquely, but rather in what it is
                      uniquely. An image’s meaning changes according to what one sees
                      immediately beside it, or what comes immediately after (Berger, 1972).
                      Images reconstruct meaning against each other’s symbolism through
                      comparative analysis. Comparative analysis of symbolism, such as
     Translucency     Jungian theory, help explain the symbolic mechanisms by which
     of Bastard-      images work in the mind (Leuthold, 2011). Using comparative analysis
     ization 1        of symbolism, The Avatars become an alternative way to view the
     – The Little
     Mermaid and
                      interaction between Hindu gods, comic-book superheroes, and Disney
     Sri Saraswati,   Princesses as a metaphor of Indo-Canadian identity.
     Kasterlee
     Belgium,         While one recognizes the positive contribution of multiculturalism
     Intaglio and     in producing cultural diversity, theorists and writers such as Stuart
     Chine-col-       Hall, Homi Bhabha, Salman Rushdie, bell hooks, and Sara Ahmed
     le print         emphasize the importance of cultural differences for notions of
     (Hahnemühle      hybridity. Multiculturalism is an attempt to both respond to and control
     paper +
     Awagami
                      the dynamic process of articulating cultural difference, demanding
     Paper for        a consensus based on a norm that cultivates cultural diversity. For
     Chine-colle),    Bhabha, the liberal relativist perspective of cultural diversity is
     39cm x 53cm.     inadequate, and does not recognize the universality and normative
                      stance from which it constructs cultural and political judgments. Ahmed
                      (2000) describes multiculturalism as the proximity of strangers. The
                      strangers are not simply those already recognized as out of place;
                      rather, in a multicultural nation, strangers have a place. Ahmed argues
                      further that multiculturalism can involve a double and contradictory
                      process of incorporation and expulsion: it may seek to differentiate
                      between strangers whose appearance of difference can be claimed
                      by the nation, and those whose differences may be dangerous to the
                      well-being of even heterogeneous nations. The proximity of strangers
                      requires constant adjustment and transformation. With the notion of
                      cultural difference, Bhabha positions himself within liminality—the in-
                      between, productive space in the construction of culture as difference
                      or otherness. However rational one is, it is very difficult, and even
                      counterproductive to try and fit together different forms of culture, and
                      to pretend they can easily coexist. The Avatars’ embodiment creates a
                      sense of uneasiness and contestation: some appear as though they are
                      tearing from one another’s opposing strangers—as if they are in forced
                      embodiment.

                      The Avatars are not about seeing the Western or the Indian selves,
                      but rather seeing a unique in-between space of negotiation—a Third
                      Space. Bhabha notes that this Third Space intervention makes the
                      structure of meaning and reference an ambivalent process; it destroys
                      mirrored representation, and reveals cultural knowledge as continuous,
                      integrated, open, and expanding code. Such intervention challenges
                      our sense of “the historical identity of culture as a homogenizing,
                      unifying force, authenticated by the original Past, and kept alive in the

30                                                                                                31
                      national tradition of the People.” The Avatars’ enunciation displaces
                      the narrative of Western’s perception, which Bhabha—pointing to
                      Benedict Anderson—so perceptively describes as being written in
                      homogeneous, serial time. The Avatar as a metaphor of Indo-Canadian
                      identity asks one to re-examine their own perception of the migrant
                      stranger.

     Transition of    Through the use of space, time, and causality in The Avatars, the images
     Becoming         depict what Lawrence Barsalou calls “situated conceptualization.”
     Mongrel          Kukkonen references psychologist and cognitive scientist Lawrence
     3 – The Little
                      Barsalou in pointing out that we process concepts not as abstract,
     Mermaid and
     Sri Saraswati,   detached combinations of features, but rather as “agent-dependent
     Kasterlee        instruction manuals” to run an embodied simulation. These embodied
     Belgium,         simulations are tied to the context of particular situations, which include
     Intaglio and     the objects and agents involved, actions and bodily states, motivations,
     Chine-col-       emotions, and cognitive operations, and often settings. In “situated
     le print         conceptualization,” thinking about concepts like “dog,” “truth,” or
     (Hahnemühle      “chair” (Barsalou’s examples) means placing ourselves in a situation
     paper +
                      with them. The embodied situations evoked by The Avatars places
     Awagami
     Paper for        the images in the situation of the Indo-Canadian self, whereby the
     Chine-colle),    migrant experience is understood as a perception. Migrant individuals
     39cm x 53cm.     perceive notions of “difference” in the new environment, but are
                      those “differences” analogous to the Canadian experience? Seeing
                      and reading images in the migrant’s perspective, one can experience
                      a sense of double embodiment. Reading the images of The Avatars
                      in terms of a situated conceptualization brings the formerly individual
                      (gods and pop characters) together in analysis; embodiment and
                      composition contribute to creating an embodied simulation of the
                      migrant experience. Indo-Canadian identity is continuously changing
                      and The Avatars, as a metaphor of migrant experience, represent such
                      interaction of time, space, and causality.

                      Conclusions
                      Articulating and enunciating concepts of cultural hybridity in graphic
                      design not only helps to comprehend the evolving cultural identities of
                      multiculturalism and migrant experience, but also promotes alternative
                      ways of representing in-between cultural spaces. How can visuals discuss
                      complex ideas of identity, difficulties in translating vernaculars—images,
                      patterns and symbols across cultures, and negotiate representation of
                      a meeting space between strangers? All of these questions highlight
                      postmodernism’s concern for difference, difficulties in communication,
                      and complexities and nuances of interests, cultures, and place.

                      The enunciation of cultural difference problematizes the division
                      of past and present, tradition and modernity, at the level of cultural
                      representation and its authoritative address.96 In signifying the
                      present, something comes to be repeated, relocated, and translated in
                      the name of tradition; it is draped in the guise of a pastness that is not a
                      truthful sign of historical memory, but rather a strategy in representing

32                                                                                                   33
authority over certain cultural groups. This conception undermines the              References
homogenizing effects of cultural symbols and icons by questioning the
sense of authority in culture, demanding that we rethink our perspective            Ahmed, S. (2000). Stranger Encounters: Embodied Others in Post-Coloniality, London:
on the identity of culture. The concept of cultural hybridity employs               Routledge.
postcolonial theories to alternatively view the past to represent a new             Aylesworth, G. (2013). “Postmodernism”, The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy,
perception of the present. Bhabha refers to Mikhail Bakhtin who states:             edited by Edward N. Zalta, 2013, accessed September 2014, http://plato.stanford.edu/
                                                                                    archives/sum2013/entries/postmodernism.

Hybrid is not only double-voiced and double-accented... But is                      Berger, J. (1972). Ways of Seeing, London: Penguin Books.
also double-languages; for in it there are not only two individual                  Bhabha, H. (1999). “The Other Question: The Stereotype and Colonial Discourse”, In
consciousness, two voices, two accents, as there are [doublings of]                 Visual Culture: The Reader, Jessica Evans and Stuart Hall (Eds.), London: Sage, pp. 293
                                                                                    - 301.
socio- linguistic, consciousness, two epochs... That come together and
consciously fight it out on the territory of the utterance... It is the collision   Bhabha, H.K. (2006). “Cultural Diversity and Cultural Differences”, In The Post Colonial
                                                                                    Studies Reader, Bill Ashcroft, Gareth Griffiths and Helen Tiffin (Eds.), New York:
between differing points of view on the world that are embedded in                  Routledge, pp. 155 - 157.
these forms... Such unconscious hybrids have been at the same time
                                                                                     “The Third Space: Interview with Homi Bhabha”, In Identity: Community, Culture,
profoundly productive historically: they are pregnant with potential for            Difference, edited by Jonathan Rutherford (London: Lawrence & Wishart, 1990), pp.
new world views, with new “internal forms” for perceiving the world in              211.
words. (Bhabha, 2006: 156)                                                          Blauvelt, A. (1994). “In and Around: Cultures of Design and the Design of Cultures
                                                                                    Part I,” Emigre 32, accessed August 2, 2014, http://www.emigre.com/Editorial.
In The World, the Text and the Critic, Edward Said states that it is in             php?sect=1&id=23.
culture that we seek out the range of meanings and ideas conveyed                   Brah, A. (1996). Cartographies of Diaspora: Contesting Identities, London: Routledge.
by the phrases belonging to, or in, a place—being at home in a place                Eck, D.L. (1998). Darsan: Seeing the Divine in India, Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.
(Said, 1983). Said further states that culture is something that one
                                                                                    Hall, S. (1990). “Cultural Identity and Diaspora”, In Identity: Community, Culture,
possesses, and, along with that proprietary process, culture designates             Difference, Jonathan Rutherford (Ed.), London: Lawrence & Wishart, pp. 222 - 237.
the boundary in which concepts of what is culturally extrinsic or intrinsic
                                                                                    Hoptman, L. (2007). “Collage Now: The Seamier Side”, In Collage: The UnMonumental
come into forceful play. Discussing “culture in graphic design” and                 Picture, London: Merrel.
“graphic design in culture” allows design to encompass multiple ways
                                                                                    Kukkonen, K. (2013). “Space, Time and Causality in Graphic Narratives: An Embodied
to engage in the production of discourse in formal development.                     Approach”, In Narratologia: From Comic Strips to Graphic Novels: Contributions to the
                                                                                    Theory and History of Graphic Narrative, Daniel Stein and Jan-Noel Thon (Eds.), Berlin:
                                                                                    De Gruyter, pp. 49 – 66.
                                                                                    Leuthold, S.M. (2011). “Art and Religion in Intercultural Contexts,” In Cross-Cultural
                                                                                    Issues in Art, New York: Routledge, pp. 94 – 122.
                                                                                    Nayar, K.E. (2004). The Sikh Diaspora in Vancouver: Three Generations Amid Tradition,
                                                                                    Modernity, and Multiculturalism, Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
                                                                                    Pieterse, J.N. (2009). Globalization and Culture: Global Mélange, Lanham: Rowman &
                                                                                    Littlefield Publishers.
                                                                                    Preston, J.J. (1985). “Creation of the Sacred Image: Apotheosis and Destruction in
                                                                                    Hinduism”, In Gods of Flesh, Gods of Stone: The Embodiment of Divinity in India,
                                                                                    Joanne Punzo Waghorne, Norman Cutler and Vasundha Narayan (Eds.), New York:
                                                                                    Columbia University Press, pp. 9 – 32.
                                                                                    Ryan, M.L. (2012). “Space”, In Living Handbook of Narratology, Peter Hühn, John Pier,
                                                                                    Wolf Schmid and Jörg Schönert (Eds.) (Hamburg: Hamburg University Press, 2012),
                                                                                    accessed March 14, 2015, http://www.lhn.uni-hamburg.de/article/space.
                                                                                    Said, E. (1983). “Introduction: Secular Criticism,” In The World, the Text and the Critic,
                                                                                    Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
                                                                                    Stoddard, E. and Cornwell, G.H. (1996). “Cosmopolitan or Mongrel? Créolité, Hybridity
                                                                                    and ‘Douglarisation’ in Trinidad”, European Journal of Cultural Studies, Vol. 2, No. 1,
                                                                                    pp. 331-353.




34                                                                                                                                                                               35
                Over the
              emptiness:
     Interpretations and
       expression of the
      term in the spaces
     of disused cinemas
                 in Milan
            Ambra Borin and Laura Galluzzo
36                                      37
Abstract                                                                          These topics are supported by new concepts that deal with the most
The concept of emptiness, since ancient times, has often been                     constructed part of the Void, which shows the form of this term and
associated with a negative connotation. The following paper analyses              how it makes itself visible in its immateriality. The Void is defined as
and investigates new possible forms to cross this meaning towards a               a multifaceted, open and collective space; in short, a public space in
new added value. Emptiness is everything, it is a center, it is space and         which movements, dynamics and variations can follow one another,
a place, it is lightness, it is immateriality but at the same time it is also     making explicit the power of time and the importance of human action.
fullness. This paper talks about a research, starting from the first term         The vacuum is conceptually the opposite of full, it is then contour,
definitions to a design opportunity, where the concept of Emptiness is            delimitation and spatial frame and finally excavation, hole and cut.
not only synonymous with “nothing”, but becomes above all a physical              Apparently, the Void may seem imperceptible, but it is present, exists
manifestation of images and sounds.                                               and manifests itself in multiple declinations. This work invites to not
                                                                                  stop at the appearance of things, and, to be able to give meaning to
To interpret the Void as a physical and a spiritual reality, as it shows itself   everything even if it has already been given before, to add a new value
through culture and art, as a built reality, and above all as an urban effect     and thus provide new forms of a hidden reality. Emptiness is power,
through the figures of the greatest philosophers, critics, artists, architects    exploited in different artistic and humanistic fields, and it is at the basis
and directors, who have always designed their definition of Void. To              of architecture since each project always starts from a void in which to
transform this research subsequently into a spatial experimentation               lay the foundations. Emptiness is space, penetrable, immersive, built,
to enhance the urban value of Emptiness, as the leitmotif of an                   habitable, superfluous space and space to be able to reinvent. Emptiness
exhibition system that aims to redevelop the disused cinemas of the               is therefore a possibility, that element available to be transformed and
Milanese territory. After a research in terms of abandoned buildings,             reused. Emptiness is full, it is matter, it is concretely abstract. Vacuum
which for years have become ‘empty-urbans’, have been selected                    is pure and ethereal, a sensitive and impalpable world, magnetic and
some abandoned cinemas in Milan with the opportunity to give new                  attractive. Emptiness is order and totality.
life to their spaces, staging the declinations and interpretations of the
Emptiness previously composed.                                                    Emptiness is a silence, moments of stillness, of mute sounds that create
                                                                                  harmony and balance. Emptiness is everything, a physical reality and a
The project that follows the research, consists of a scenario with the            significant value of things.
aim of combining the concept of living the Void as a visual and spatial
experience and a curatorial setting of case studies selected. The result          Shapes of emptiness
is a system of relations between empty interpretations and the various            The Void is defined by the matter that surrounds it and that gives it
abandoned theatres in the territory, with a specific in-depth study of            tactility, to be a haptic space, able to build a mutual contact between us
the project in the spaces of a historic cinema in the center of the city of       and the environment, emotional and phenomenal, in which the matter
Milan: Manzoni cinema.                                                            interacts with the light and with the body; it can accommodate man
                                                                                  and on the basis of this relationship acquire meaning, being therefore
Introduction                                                                      a space that connects subject and object, the object to its context,
The goal of this paper is to overcome every negative meaning of the               internal and external. The interest in this type of space lies in these
term and to go beyond the prejudices that are based on a collective               properties that lead to a modification of contemporary architecture,
thought where the void is conceived as nothing.                                   to the overcoming of singular objects, to a new relationship between
                                                                                  inhabitant and space, between architecture and city, from a closed
In oriental cultures, emptiness is not an aspect to be afraid of at all, to       and self-referential space to a relational space. In fact, it is “the quality
be looked at with suspicion, it does not bring with it negative aspects           of emptiness that determines the peculiarities of our perceptible
as western thought does; on the contrary, it is a generating element of           surroundings” (Zennaro, 2001). In architecture, the void is not an abstract
order and purity, meditation and the sacral. In parallel to these topics,         space, absolute, devoid of matter as it is defined in the mathematical
an observation of an architectural and artistic nature is introduced,             physical field. It can also be an element, the contour, that delimits an
dealing with people who have dealt with this subject in the past and              open space - as we have already seen in past eras where it was the
then carry out the greatest works recognized worldwide. However, it is            generating centre of the context - that defines the perfect envelope of
interesting to note that by examining different protagonists we have              a ‘room’ of the city. In fact, the building does not define the form of the
different visual manifestations and results, and that each of them has a          void, but shatters into different architectural nuclei, opening up these
personal vision that is not identical to that of the others.                      contours and multiple units of planes, surfaces and volumes, creating a
                                                                                  Modern scenic perspective. Emptiness, by definition, should be a place


38                                                                                                                                                                39
where there is nothing, inverse to full, neither object nor substance, a       compression. In this way, comparing oneself with space in architecture
place without a body, a non-place without space.                               means intuiting and therefore governing the relations between the
                                                                               parts of the composition, which are often hidden behind the overall
Emptiness, by definition, should be a place where there is nothing,            image of a work; it is the configuration of a limit that confers form and
inverse to full, neither object nor substance, a place without a body, a       identity to the space. The city is a meeting place, in which the dynamic
non-place without space. For a discipline like architecture, emptiness         social transformations which affect human life in its history are more
and absence have a paradoxical role because they are traditionally in          evident. The city is the scene of new lifestyles, manufacturing, work and
antithesis to any physicality and yet maintain an undoubted generative         the use of the spaces of which it is composed (Espuelas, 1999). Urban
value; Rem Koolhaas, in several critical contributions, underlined the         voids can be described as those spaces that have been deteriorated or
enormous potential of absence as a proliferative factor and emptiness          are not intended for use, places where it is possible for those activities
as a strategy to trigger innovation: “where there is nothing, nothing is       of social innovation to manifest themselves. If cities are the moments
impossible. Where there is architecture, nothing is possible” (Koolhaas,       of encounter with time, memory and people, it becomes interesting to
1985). Architecture is directly connected to its ability to interpret and      analyse them starting from the physical place where this happens, in
arrange relationships for the definition of spaces that are characterized      other words the public space: the matrix of the city’s voids (Espuelas,
as the most authentic expression of an era. It finds a response to a new       1999).
experiential dimension of the “perception of space capable of involving
geometry and proportion, matter and light, tangible and immaterial,            The Void in the city is the shared space, already seen in the previous
understood as pairs of prerogatives necessary to recognize the status          paragraphs when the Greek polis was explored, where people express
of architecture as an art form” (Russo, 2018).                                 themselves and where architecture has the possibility of rooting its own
                                                                               meaning. It is usual to think of cities from their buildings and to imagine
Emptiness is a creative condition and the best support for life. Bernard       the urban form from the full. By reversing this vision, it is possible to
Tschumi (1996), argues that the architectural void is, first and foremost,     understand what it means to look at an urban landscape by studying
a kind of open space, available to the project as “unplanned”: this is         the form and meaning of the spaces between the architectures, thus
the location of the events. It is necessary to think about the necessity       considering the void with the same importance that is given to the full.
and the difficulties to “give rise with a new project to the complex           “What seems to be of interest is no longer architecture as such, nor,
interweaving of social relationships and that “make” the city (Tschumi,        after all, its relationship if it remains only on an architectural level, but
1996). The part without matter, in a certain the fact that the subject         the connective tissue that binds them. In this way, the idea of emptiness
matter itself is the subject matter is not as useful as it is the subject      is very close to that of the environment, understood as a unifying fluid of
matter itself, but is the generating part of it, the part without which “the   relations, rather than objects” (Purini, 2008). The intention is to look at
object would have no meaning in terms of utility. Everything draws its         those voids of the city full of forms, trades, relationships and meanings,
existence and functionality from the presence of what does not exist,          as the primary field of investigation of architectural research, observing
i.e. from emptiness, from the absence of space occupied by material’           the space ‘between things’ no longer as that which separates two full
(Zennaro, 2001).                                                               spaces, pause, absence, but as an architecture in all respects, which
                                                                               separates and relates the built, people, and places, “the space that is
The Void is never something neutral, but rather a dynamic field of             left is as important as the space that is filled” (Távora, 1996).
attractive and repulsive forces in interaction, which triggers distance
relations between the parts that make up and delimit the space. As in the      The urban void is therefore understood as an inhabited-place with a
case of magnetic and gravitational fields, these forces are linked to the      high density of events, forms, meanings and, above all, a main source of
masses and their respective distances, so composing spaces essentially         urban identity. In urban planning, the void represents an organizational
means creating links between the parts, defining the ways and distances        element, an instrument of measurement and dynamic stability, and the
with which they will be arranged. In this sense, building an architecture      empty space between the buildings, as a place of putting into relation
does not mean putting a stone on another or placing objects in a space;        between the parts, acquires a central role so strong as to overshadow the
architecture is the construction of the void, of the immaterial form of        singularity of the architectural objects themselves in support of a unitary
space, which in many ways refers to what Heidegger means by Raum               system that unites the full and the empty. Therefore, interpreting the
(Heiddeger, 1969). This german word literally refers to space and in its       urban space as a system of places that welcome the dialogue between
ancient meaning is intended to indicate a free-space for a settlement of       buildings means thinking about the topology of the urban system as
colonists and suggests the need for a relationship between emptiness           a whole, regardless of its specific forms. From this initial definition of
and fullness. This is how a precise function of architecture is defined,       void, it can be affirmed that it is, within the urban structure, the sphere
which in this way is configured in a work of intersections between things,     of mediation and relationship, the scenario of urban facts and therefore
in a definition of relationships at a distance, in a work of expansion and     the place of the city in which the collective structure is reflected and
40                                                                                                                                                             41
therefore its own identity. Cities were born when not buildings, but            contained space is transformed into space containing: from occupied
unbuilt spaces have taken on meaning, or rather, when this meaning              space to defined space. The Void, from contained space between full
has begun to prevail over the meanings of individual buildings [...] cities     spaces, becomes space containing the multitude of situations of the
have their strengths especially in open spaces, those that can be defined       dispersed city. In this way, it is possible to overturn the argument and
as ‘unbuilt’). From these considerations we can construct a reflection on       transform the negative scenario of empty space as an unoccupied and
the empty urban issue, investigated in its various implications, which          uncharacterized place into a place that is available, flexible, adaptable
seeks to trace a new path attentive to the quality of space between             and transformable.
things, given that for years architects have not only not spoken about
spaces, but they have not even known how to imagine and build.                  In a parallelism with spoken language, and as it has already been dealt
                                                                                with previously, this void can be traced back to an ordered silence, as a
The Void, “by its very nature not directly objective, seems something           necessary suspension, an essential interval, which becomes a dimension
difficult to understand, not easily comprehensible, like the smoke              between the stillness of the gaze and the tension of knowledge, and
that passes between the fingers, and therefore destined to escape               goes to distance itself and move away from a ‘nothing’ and to confirm
reflection. For this reason, while on one side the theme of emptiness           itself in that ‘everything’ capable of tracing a fence of references and
has an undeniable conceptual and practical interest, on the other side it       arranging an open field of relationships. “For me there is a beautiful
entails an evident difficulty in defining clear and defined fields of action”   silence in relation to a building, which I connect to notions such as calm,
(Zucchi, 2016). The system of these urban voids includes not only those         naturalness, durability, presence and integrity, but also warmth and
spaces of the city where the city’s public life is being staged, but also       sensuality; to be oneself, to be a building, not to represent something,
those places where temporality and stratifications of elements that can         but to be something” (Zumthor, 1991).
be perceived through streets, courtyards, galleries or squares come into
relation. They are spaces that tell the story of a place and communicate        Emptiness in Milan
with an immediate hierarchy a given urban area. Russo (2018) declares           The term emptiness when referring to cities, is used to indicate residual
that “the void of the square is defined by the buildings that make up           spaces without any use, urban voids, the system of squares and streets
the adjacent urban nature. It lives and multiplies its presence thanks to       of compact cities, places that have lost their meaning as disused areas,
its recognizable shape in the fabric, to the amount of volume given by          disused buildings, former agricultural areas, open spaces of the suburbs
its size, to the pressure defined by its margin and by the density linked       conceived only as detachments or urban standards.
to the quality of light that characterizes it”.
                                                                                Milan is a dense and structured city, but also a fragmented city. In the
In the contemporary urban context, it is now evident how much the               transition out of Fordist industrialism, the city broke up. Not only in its
urban emptiness that is generally identified in a square or in a free or        urban geometry, but also in the multiplication of internal boundaries
open space, is no longer a unique relationship and thus opens up to             between the splinters of its social composition. There is a synchrony
new scenarios not yet fully investigated and tested by the architectural        between the urban centrifugation of the city and the creation of internal
project. In this sense it seems very useful to wonder about the possible        barriers of an almost anthropological type between the different
declinations of the theme of open space, deepening the fundamental              fragments of its social body; a coexistence between pieces of a naked
concepts of emptiness, space and place. There is a precise intention to         city, lost and left on the margins. It has been possible to trace five
trace a unitary path between art and architecture, which starting from          fragments of the social composition of Milan from the beginning of
the most conceptual and abstract declinations of emptiness, formally            the twentieth century to the present day, using the metaphor of circles
materializes in the theme of space and in particular of urban space, and        that converge in the same urban centre. “The first circle, the inner one,
finally sees its point of arrival in the concept of place that represents       reveals a Milan of the neo-bourgeoisie of flows and networks, where
an attribute of quality and meaning in the relationship between space           power is managed by mobility on a global scale. The second circle
and man. Empty spaces can be understood as urban reserves for the               encloses the Milanese trade and how the areas of the city are divided
experimentation of collective dreams.                                           by area and commercial purpose. The third circle, on the other hand,
                                                                                sees as its protagonist a multitude of workers employed in the tertiary
In conclusion, the voids can be not only residual spaces but also places        sector of maintenance, distribution, collective catering, etc.. This circle
of connections, large areas that structure and regulate the discipline of       also includes all the disused areas, those occupied, with temporary
the islands, preventing their reunification through building activity; a        settlements and nomad camps that describe Milan as the city of the
giant infrastructure called upon to hold the exploded city together. The        invisible. Continuing, the fourth describes the social component of
role of open space, of a non-internal open space, appears more difficult        entertainment and creativity, communication and the artistic professions.
to recognize where it can be considered, in reverse order to what               Finally, the fifth circle is that of the city outside the walls, where there
happened in the city of ancient regime, pervasive element that gives            is a very large portion of industrial enterprises, from the smallest to the
42                                                                                                                                                             43
largest” (Bonomi, 2008). This account of Milan’s main fragmentations           theme of the urban landscape in his works. He has produced several
anticipates the fact that it is an Italian city whose role is to be the node   series that deal with these topics, but with Dentro la città Basilico he
of the global network. With the emergence of new global flows, in fact,        tackles the theme of the representation of space and architecture in
the city increases its centrality and becomes a privileged place for social    different ways. He affirms that the void in architecture is much more
and global economic development. This image of a great generating              than a lack of matter, it is an integral part of architecture, a structural
machine, Milan is transformed from a place to a flow: passing from             part of its being. The presence of a man is enough to restore the void
the valorization of culture and interpersonal relationships, to have           to its dramatic sense of absence.
the sole purpose of creating as many connections as possible outside
the walls of the same generating city. Bringing losses to the starting         Likewise, there are two parallel stories for a single city, those of Colombo
territorial level. The city-flow is praised by eroding the city-location.      and Hänninen, two visions that integrate masterfully telling not only
Milan yesterday. Milan today. Milan as it was and as it is now. Two            what happened and did not happen in Milan but also two different
stories but that make it one, but certainly two different worlds. In the       declinations of language in images. Colombo began his journey in the
middle of time, the evolution of society, changes in customs, changes          fifties, telling a city full of poetry that in a few years will become the scene
in language. The city, industry, but above all the human landscape, that       of hope and then tensions, practices a street photography attentive to
system of relationships that define the sense of space animating it with       faces, small events, relationships between people and spaces. In 2010
intentions.                                                                    Giovanni Hänninen turned his attention not to the inevitable changes
                                                                               but to the transformations that had not taken place, to the immobile
The change in terms of economic and social development has been                finds of a city waiting for something to happen, he used documentary
the main cause of a great transformation at the Milanese territorial           language, an architectural vision and carried out an almost catalogical
level. As if it were a second city, a virtual city with forgotten pieces of    investigation of the places that the development of the city has left to
Milan. An urban reality takes shape, assembled with places out of time,        themselves. Hänninen does not intend to make a work of denunciation
which seemed to have fulfilled their mission, but also with buildings that     and in fact does not like the concept of abandonment, preferring to
would still be able to live and serve the citizens. It seems like a dormant    define Milan as a waiting city that is also the title of this research. His
city, huddled between skyscrapers and great works of art of a hungry           photographs, all made in elegant prints with delicate colours, are a
metropolis of success. Uncertainty, bankruptcies, economic reasons,            continuous and surprising revelation: “I have never entered these
political reasons, projects aborted even before their completion.              places illegally and, to overcome the hardest obstacles, some places
There are many causes that have made buildings invisible and, often,           are hidden behind high walls. I define them as empty spaces inhabited
a refuge for the invisible; these are not the peripheries of a retreating      by those who sleep here, live or enter only to browse or play, a humanity
city, but places scattered throughout the urban fabric of a metropolis         that many do not want to see”.
that proceeds with the construction of new towers. An absent Milan,
distracted by cementing every void, to listen to the silences of buildings     Città in attesa is a proposal for analysis, a strong suggestion addressed
waiting for ideas and courage. These are places that do not want to            to the city that must critically address the limits of the past to better plan
remain the same as themselves, but that are ready to transform by              the future and, of course, the present. Over four million cubic metres.
adapting to new functions, fighting against the deterioration that             This is the figure for abandoned buildings in the city of Milan. These are
gradually breaks their foundations and nature that, quiet, takes back          public and private offices no longer used, former factories and railway
the spaces that have been taken away.                                          stations, farmsteads surrounded by green parks, etc..

Documenting this dual identity of Milan was possible thanks to                 An immense heritage of abandoned buildings in Milan that, thanks
authors who share a love for photography and for the city in which             to the census started in 2014 by the municipality, you can document
they live: Gabriele Basilico, Cesare Colombo and Giovanni Hänninen             and understand the situation through the current photograph of the
in an exhibition in 2013 at the Galleria Bel Vedere in Milan entitled          existing city, reporting all those situations that are perceived as a state
Una città per due. One of Basilico’s most interesting works is Milan.          of decay and inactivity. The census is divided into macro-areas to better
Portraits of factories, a mapping of the still active or already disused       understand the buildings: buildings, large built areas and free areas.
factories in Milan that he himself led at the end of the seventies and that    Empty, abandoned, are many buildings of the sixties and seventies
significantly marks the beginning of his long work on the contemporary         that marked the development of the city. Others, on the other hand,
urban landscape in its modifications. These are images of the Milanese         are simply the result of building speculation. Today, in a city that is
suburbs that present a visual recomposition of a little-known, marginal        experiencing a growth in inequalities, a growth in illegal occupations,
landscape. The work is the result of a long investigation that takes           urban planning is changing and must also deal with these realities.
industrial architecture as its emblem. Basilico, incessantly tackles the       Various associations and educational experiments have also considered
                                                                               the revaluation and restoration of these empty and abandoned areas to
44                                                                                                                                                                45
be an excellent subject for design and analysis.                               Film Festival were presented at the Teatro Lirico. An initiative that has
The projects suggest different scales of intervention and different            been very popular since 1984 is the exhibition of films in their original
disciplinary connotations: architectural and urban planning, urban             language. At the beginning, screenings were held at the Dal Verme and
planning, technology, restoration and conservation, aimed at outlining         Paris cinemas.
scenarios, often alternative, of functional reuse, reconversion, even for
temporary uses, and technological adaptation of a heritage relevant for        All these initiatives, in any case, are not enough to stem an increasingly
size and diffusion in the city. The temporary use of space is configured       pressing crisis, which affects above all the city’s film exhibition, both
in this sense as an opportunity for the city, as a laboratory for the          in terms of structures and consumption. In the 1980s, increasingly
inhabitants to become actors and re-interpret continuously parts of the        advanced technologies made it possible to watch films on television,
city and city; practices of temporary use such as interactive construction,    record them, rent them and even buy them at newsstands. The
dynamic products unstable and not predetermined.                               phenomenon of the transition to red light cinemas also continues.
                                                                               Therefore, the crisis of the cinema does not consist in a productive
     “A strategy to consider effectively open, indeterminate the               collapse but in the crisis of the cinemas. Many Milanese theatres
     interaction during which - and not before - are defined the               began to close in the 1980s, while the rest were concentrated in the
     actors, materials and interests at stake, and the relationships and       centre, whose success was associated with the possibility of combining
     rules of interaction, between them” (Crosta, 2011).                       shopping, catering and entertainment.

Temporary urbanism is a potential lever to encourage the re-                   The multiplex is yet another attempt to respond to the crisis by
appropriation of urban spaces in the time of the ephemeral; a way to           diversifying the supply and creating smaller cinemas than the original,
trigger the awareness and knowledge of citizenship towards the city,           which were difficult to fill in their entirety. The decline of the city’s
and a form of living in the city, able to combine pervasiveness of the         theatres continues inexorably from the second half of the 1990s to the
information system and response to the alienation produced by the              present day. In addition to the factors already mentioned, there are
coldness of technological mediation, also attributing new meanings             three other causes: the development of multiplexes, the spread of the
to the tiles that make up the city. “Contrary to the more traditional          Internet and the advent of the digital age.
forms of urban planning, (re-)temporary use projects define areas where
prototypes of a new urbanity can be tested, and allow the processes            The first multiplex opened in Italy dates back to 1997 and immediately
of development to be wrong and reoriented. The knowledge and                   imposed itself as an alternative model. Located in the suburbs of the city,
experience of places are the result of crossing and losing oneself; walks,     often close to the main road junctions, the multiplex offers the customer,
events and performances then become a humble method to look at                 no longer just a spectator, a series of attractive comforts. Another
the territories of abandonment, which before being redesigned and              competitive factor for the cinema has been the recent development
remeaned, can be experienced as repositories of stories” (Inti, 2014).         of the internet and the consequent possibility to download films, even
The premises listed above, through various examples, have the task             as soon as they have been released, to be seen at home without any
of providing clarity through a quick analysis of the situation of the          expense. The real innovation of the last few years is the transition to
buildings and areas of Milan that express vacuity and abandonment, but         digital cinema which, involving the production and distribution sectors,
at the same time are an example of a possible rebirth and revitalization       sees the abandonment of the film. The advantages of this change are
through a social commitment and design of re-use of spaces. Giving             the quality of the support, which does not deteriorate over time, the
a second life to spaces that are no longer interesting, but at the same        low costs for interventions on the copies, the lightness and low cost
time maintain their identity and remain faithful to their city-place. In the   of the equipment for shooting, which allows even small independent
following paragraphs the attention of this sense of abandonment within         productions to shoot quality films.
Milan and a possible revenge of these spaces, will focus on the sensitive
and critical character of the abandoned rooms in the area.                     However, the adoption of the new technology entails significant changes
                                                                               in the field of instrumentation, where the film projector is replaced by
Cinemas and Emptiness                                                          the digital projector. The management of the cinema and the creation
It is interesting to make a historical excursus and analyze what were          of an archive become two determined factors that must be organized
the causes and effects of what is called the Italian film crisis. It was in    and this operation is not always simple, given the relative costs. Once
the 1980s that a profound transformation of the economic, social and           again, it is especially the small exhibitors of small city cinemas who,
cultural life of the city was outlined in Milan. In recent years, cinema       despite public funding, are struggling to bear the costs of digital.
has also become a means of relaunching the image of the city and the
city of Milan promotes numerous exhibitions and initiatives. The 1980          It is in this perspective that in Milan, as in many other Italian cities,
festival was a great success, when the films in competition at the Venice      the problem of the role of disused cinemas within the city’s fabric is
46                                                                                                                                                           47
beginning to arise more and more, and like many declining stars,                                    the many possibilities offered by a large empty space such as that of a
they are waiting for the spotlight to be focused on them again. If the                              projection room.
question of abandoned areas in a city like Milan is a widely visited field
of research. It is outlined in this way the city’s historical centre, its blocks                    “The ideal cinema is the hall of silence. The viewer must be able to
and radio-centric expansions are inserted like tiles in a constellation of                          get lost in an imaginary infinite space” (Holl, 1991). By portraying the
fragments. The heterogeneity of these places, which includes empty                                  architecture of the cinema hall, we can learn a lot about film space. The
lots, abandoned buildings and incomplete or crumbling structures,                                   cinema images taken by contemporary photographer Hiroshi Sugimoto
opens up to a different vision of the city, made up of small portions                               provide a condensed historical view. It portrays the hybrid spatial
that fit into the different spaces of which the urban fabric is composed.                           archaeology of cinema. In his work one has the feeling of ‘living’ in
The investigation as a vision is metaphorically linked to a recurring                               the pure space of the cinema, which becomes the essential experience
typology within the decommissioning: the cinemas. In their nature as                                of cinema. It is an emotional topography that takes place within the
parts and as a whole, cinemas are guiding elements for investigating                                architectural transport of the ‘home’ of cinema. The cinema is in fact a
changes in the city. This is a widespread condition which, in line with                             house: place of origin of travel, interior architecture, is a map of cultural
the morphological development of the typology, takes on different                                   movements.
but recognizable structures, capable of describing urbanity in different
ways each time. These two developments are accompanied by different                                 The fourteen portraits that will be analyzed are cinemas that have
relational possibilities, linked to the way in which the cinema faces                               remained abandoned and disused to this day, and represent
the city and the internal structure of the cinema. If on the one hand                               suspensions within the urban fabric. With this analytical and later design
lights and posters are recurrent elements, the spatial development of                               narrative, the aim is to investigate the symbolic value of these places,
the accesses to cinemas calibrates in different ways the relationship                               where space and time are fundamental elements in the typological
between the space of the street and the interiority of the cinemas.                                 and morphological making of the parts. In this sense, following the
In their fragmentary nature, disused cinemas are silent witnesses of                                development of these cinemas allows us to glimpse the contemporary
social and cultural changes that, at the end of the last century, have                              possibilities of a spatial renewal. A design that takes care of these
led to the failure of a large number of cinemas, involving both the                                 abandoned places, spaces denied to the city, in an attempt to reactivate
most central ones and those in the suburbs. However, despite attempts                               them as a weak and widespread urban infrastructure starting from an
to survive, a large part of the city’s cinemas closed by the end of the                             internal void, bringing new meanings and ways of use.
1990s. The former cinemas, like the tiles of a mosaic, give a complex
image, made up of spaces and uses that have changed over time; the                                  From this analytical and literary premise comes the need to temporarily
old buildings today house the most disparate functions, also thanks to                              restore a new look to these empty spaces, and to stage their essence
                                                                                   Figure 2.                                                                                        Figure 2. Map
                                                                                   Theatres by                                                                                      of the four-
                                                                                   Hiroshi                                                                                          teen disused
                                                                                   Sugimoto,                                                                                        cinemas in
                                                                                   2015. https://                                                                                   Milan
                                                                                   www.sugi-
                                                                                   motohiroshi.
                                                                                   com/aban-
                                                                                   doned-theater




48                                                                                                                                                                                            49
ex novo through the Void in its infinite interpretations. It was decided                      irreversible crisis. The cinema ended its activity in July 2006. Artistic
to analyse which were the abandoned Milanese cinemas, to take an                              constraints prevent the transformation into a multiplex. In the following
interest in their history, their success and what were the causes of their                    years, while the theatre continues its successful activity until today, the
failure. Emphasizing their most salient aspects, it was planned to create                     spaces of the cinema are sold and used for rent only occasionally for
a system that would connect the fourteen selected cinemas with the                            some fashion shows, exhibitions and various events.
fifteen categories that are respective to the theme of Emptiness.
                                                                                              A system of diffuse exhibitions in disused cinemas in Milan
Empty. Milan. Abandoned cinemas and again the Void. A closer look at                          The project consists of an exhibition scenario with the aim of combining
one of the selected cinemas, the Cinema Manzoni, which is the oldest                          the concept of living the void as a visual and spatial experience and a
and most central among the others, and already a location for cultural                        curatorial setting of the case studies previously examined. The result is
events and exhibitions, has determined the design aspect of the thesis,                       a system of relations between the fifteen empty interpretations and the
which has allowed us to create the basis for this paper.                                      fourteen abandoned theatres of the territory, with a specific in-depth
                                                                                              study of design in the spaces of a historic cinema in the centre of the
The Manzoni cinema, located in via Manzoni 40 in Milan, in a complex                          city of Milan: the Manzoni cinema.
of commercial buildings began its activity as a cinema in 1950. The
structural and static part was designed by the architect Mario Cavallè,                       Being mainly a thesis project, what follows this multidisciplinary
while the decorative part was designed by the architects Bergonzo,                            analysis is a hypothesis of transformation and change, underlining
Fratino and Tedeschi. The group of architects built the entire building                       the cultural and spatial importance of these disused and abandoned
complex: an underground theatre with 1000 seats, a 1600-seat cinema                           cinemas. The thesis project is a means of communication and a tool
at the stadium, located at an altitude of 7 metres above the road                             to give voice to the void, which shows its most interesting features
surface, an 800-square-metre atrium, an all-store gallery at street level,                    and thus develop a new meaning with added values. The path taken
a restaurant and an office building. From the atrium depart the large                         for the realization of this project is divided into several phases that
stairs that disengage the theater and the cinema, located respectively                        see the void as the protagonist. In the foreground, as an initial phase
under and above the atrium itself. The volumetric organism is therefore                       there is an in-depth research of the theme, dealing with historical,
made up of three large superimposed vases: the first consists of the                          physical and scientific topics, and then move on to a cultural vision,
underground theatre, the second of the covered square, the third of                           an observation of an architectural and artistic nature, as was discussed
the large stadium cinema, whose plan resembles the shape of a violin.                         in the previous paragraphs. This research phase is accompanied by a
There are numerous previews at the Manzoni cinema, invitational                               further investigation that ends with a series of interpretations of the
evenings, parties, conventions and presentations. The last two years                          void divided into categories, showing the most similar case studies that
have been managed by Cinecittà (Istituto Luce), which tries to relaunch                       can return a visual and concrete idea, opening more possibilities of
cinema with events, seminars and conferences for companies, morning                           events touching different fields of reference. Emptiness as everything.
screenings for schools, but this is not enough to save Manzoni from an
                                                                             Figure 3.                                                                                      Figure 4.
                                                                             The Manzo-                                                                                     Pensieri by
                                                                             ni Cinema,                                                                                     Edoardo
                                                                             Milan. http://                                                                                 Tresoldi,
                                                                             www.giusep-                                                                                    2015. https://
                                                                             perausa.it/                                                                                    www.artwave.
                                                                             cinema_man-                                                                                    it/arte/artisti/
                                                                             zoni_-_milano.                                                                                 cupole-daria/
                                                                             html




50                                                                                                                                                                                       51
The interpretations, which have been created specifically for this                listening to is emptiness. A silent and moving dialogue that never
purpose, are as follows:                                                          leaves you indifferent, is the one interpreted by Marina Abromović
                                                                                  (The artist is present, 2010). During the whole time the artist stood
     • Spatial Flexibility: the attention to the theme of flexibility is          still, in silence, sitting in front of a table for many hours a day,
     apparently produced in a void, which hides inside an entire fact of          meeting the eyes of the public, who, almost like in a solemn pagan
     several parts. Through gestures, design or dynamic by the user, it is        ritual, approached her slowly and sat in front of her, for as long as
     possible to transform this space into a multifunctional and habitable        they thought it necessary.
     space according to unpredictable laws.                                       • More is More: one of the most serious diseases we suffer from
     • Spatial Delimitation: boundary or limit, it is presented as a two-         is that of the Full: the illness of those who live in a continuous
     dimensional and sometimes three-dimensional geometric meaning,               mental state occupied by a whirlwind of demolished words,
     it consists mostly of a demarcation of a space that apparently isolates      stolidly recurrent images, useless and unfounded certainties, fears
     itself from the context, leaving something outside and incorporating         formulated in sentences before emotions.
     something inside.
     • Spatial Immersivity: an experience of blurred vision and loss, a                                                                                   Figure 5. The
     total immersion of the body in an enveloping space.                                                                                                  Artist is Pres-
                                                                                                                                                          ent by Marina
     • Passage: a passage, banally a corridor, is configured as a real
                                                                                                                                                          Abramovič,
     element that can project the observer in an unlimited perspective,                                                                                   2010. https://
     open, or forced.                                                                                                                                     commons.
     • intheMiddle: different ways of filling a void, adding value and                                                                                    wikimedia.
     completely changing the vision of space.                                                                                                             org/wiki/
     • Framework: the act of describing a part of a large component                                                                                       File:Mari-
     within a pre-established boundary frame, delimiting a celestial void,                                                                                na_Abramo-
     that is, the sky that interposes itself between the architectures.                                                                                   vić,_The_Art-
                                                                                                                                                          ist_is_Pres-
     • Bubbles: able to remain in spherical formation for a few seconds,
                                                                                                                                                          ent,_2010_(2).
     and then burst. So the ‘architectural bubbles’ are made of emptiness,                                                                                jpg
     air and free space that add value to the urban scenario.
     • Suspension: the only material from which this suspension is made
     is air.
     • Pure White: clean, ethereal and almost empty white is often the
     object of the greatest works of art that seem to cancel out the entire
     canvas. It is the non-color that par excellence directs the rules of
     emptiness.                                                                The second of the research is based on the concept of interpreting the
     • Presence/Absence: “But this is the very condition of existence.         void on an urban scale, what are the relationships and whether they
     Making oneself spring means accepting the risk of winter. To be a         exist between the void, always as a protagonist and the urban territory,
     presence means to accept the risk of absence” (de Saint-Exupéry,          between the most hidden corners and the ghosts of cement that lie
     1943). For this category it is interesting to mention the artist          behind the tallest skyscrapers Milanese. It was decided to analyze
     Edoardo Tresoldi, who through his sculptures tells the dialogue that      which were the abandoned Milanese cinemas, to take an interest in
     is established between an empty net figure and the surrounding            their history, their success and what were the causes of their failure.
     space. To cite one of his most important Pensieri (2013), which           Emphasizing their most salient aspects, it was planned to create a
     represents an absence of thought, a moment frozen in time.                system that would relate the fourteen cinemas selected with the fifteen
     • Trace: The track express reality by means of an external element,       categories respective to the theme of Emptiness. A closer look at one
     in this case absent.                                                      of the selected cinemas, the Cinema Manzoni, which is the oldest and
     • Memory: The purpose of these case studies is to transfigure a           most central among the others, and already a location for cultural
     concept such as absence and memory, translating it into a feeling         events and exhibitions, has determined the design aspect of the thesis.
     experienced in the intimacy of the individual through sensory             Emptiness as a manifestation of Presence/Absence and Silent Noise,
     perceptions.                                                              thus succeeds in giving a new image to the spaces of the structure,
     • inVisible: not seeing things allows us to imagine new worlds, new       transforming its function into another while maintaining a contemporary
     stories and new spaces, stimulates our imagination, everything that       artistic imprint. The atmosphere that has been created inside the spaces
     was not there before, takes shape.                                        of the Manzoni cinema, can be traced back to a large mysterious cloud
     • Silent Noise: Without noise and discover that what you are not          that enters the atrium overwhelmingly disorienting anyone. This cloud,
52                                                                                                                                                                    53
haze, becomes more and more rarefied as it rises in level. The more             of the whole project is to have hypothesized a network of connections
the space of the cinema comes alive and therefore Presence is created,          between cinemas, which turn on and off during a precise and pre-
the more the blurred cloud diminishes. The void is filled with the              established period of time, referring to the Manzoni cinema as the
experience of those who enter this space. The intent of the project, as         central hub and generator of the interpretations of emptiness. The void
already mentioned several times, is to be able to give concreteness to          exists and through the void there is something else.
this void, through different manifestations. For the communication and
the graphic elements to complete the visual picture of the exhibition           Conclusions
system, it has been thought to realize everything through the technique         The objective set at the beginning of this work was to overcome every
of the survey. Having the possibility to orient oneself through texts and       negative meaning of the term and to go beyond, to go beyond, the
graphics in relief is a point in favor for the entire space and those who       prejudices that are based on a collective thought where the void is
live it for the right time of the event. Basically, the Manzoni cinema will     conceived as the ‘nothing’.
be the central pivot from which a system is triggered that will see the
other theatres turn on every day at thematic intervals. The opening and         Apparently, the void may seem imperceptible. But the void exists,
closing day will be entirely dedicated to the Manzoni cinema and its            exists and manifests itself in multiple declinations. The work presented
spaces, while from the second day on, the others will also come alive. In       is a search for months in which the term has been treated with care
parallel with these openings, the Manzoni cinema will always be open,           and deep investigation, maintaining an interpretative approach
also in the evening, thanks to an evening programme of screenings of            critical to its final composition. This work invites us not to stop at the
eight films selected from among Ozu’s greatest successes. Through this          appearance of things, and to succeed in giving meaning to everything,
hypothesis of cultural and artistic event at the same time, it reveals itself   even if it has already been given before, in order to add a new value
to the true essence of Void. Living through a few but effective elements        and provide new forms of a hidden reality. The idea of undertaking
an ethereal and sublime experience.                                             research work on the void is born from a personal curiosity, to reveal
                                                                                what is not always considered and brought to light. Emptiness is power,
The installation develops throughout the empty space of the Cinema              exploited in different artistic and humanistic fields, and it is at the base
Manzoni: the atrium, the foyer on the first and second floors, and finally      of architecture since every project always starts from a void in which to
the internal projection room. The concept of void is expressed in these         lay the foundations. Emptiness is space, penetrable, immersive, built,
spaces through a vaporous cloud conductor with different levels of              habitable, superfluous space and space to be able to reinvent.
intensity for the entire cinema.
                                                                                   Emptiness is therefore a possibility, that element available to be
To represent the two interpretations of emptiness chosen for the                   transformed and reused.
Manzoni cinema, namely Presence / Absence and Silent Noise, during                 Emptiness is a possibility of change.
the exhibition you can interact with some works, as well as case                   Emptiness is full, it is matter, it is concretely abstract.
studies examined during the analysis, which strengthen the concept                 Emptiness is pure and ethereal, a sensitive and impalpable world,
of emptiness and experience. In these spaces, one feels immersed                   magnetic and attractive.
and captured by a white and suspended atmosphere of emptiness,                     Emptiness is order and totality.
sometimes interrupted by silences or absent images. Giving shape                   Emptiness is a silence, moments of flat calm, of mute sounds that
to the void, giving a materiality to this concept. The design intent, as           create harmony and balance. Emptiness is everything, a physical
already mentioned several times, is to be able to give concreteness to             reality and a significant value of things.
this void, through different manifestations. For the communication and             From Emptiness everything is created and everything returns.
the graphic elements to complete the visual picture of the exhibition
system, it was decided to realize everything through the technique of
relief. Having the possibility to orient oneself through texts and graphics
in relief is a point in favor for the entire space and those who live it for
the right time of the event.

This system of spatial and experiential relationships, consists of an
exhibition scenario with the aim of combining the concept of living the
void as a visual and spatial experience and a curatorial setting of case
studies previously examined. It is always necessary to start from a void,
to demonstrate the true essence of things. The most interesting part

54                                                                                                                                                             55
References
Adobati, F. (2018). Biografie sospese. Un’esplorazione dei luoghi densamente disabitati
della Lombardi. (Garda, A c. Di). Mimesis Kosmos.
Arìs, C. M. (2002). Silenzi Eloquenti. Borges, Mies Van der Rohe, Ozu, Rothko, Oteiza
(Christian Marinotti Edizioni). Marinotti.
Basilico, G. (s.d.). Architetture, città, visioni. Bruno Mondadori.
Basilico, G., Valtorta, R., & Boeri, S. (2009). Milano: ritratti di fabbriche. 24 Ore Cultura.
Bonomi, A. (2008). MIlano ai tempi delle moltitudini. Vivere, lavorare, produrre nella
città. Bruno Mondadori.
Crosta, P. (2011). Riuso temporaneo, come pratica che ‘apprende’la cittadinanza?.
Territorio.
Espuelas, F. (1999). Il Vuoto. Riflessioni sullo spazio in architettura (Christian Marinotti
Edizioni). Marinotti.
Heidegger, M. (2003). L’ arte e lo spazio. Il nuovo melangolo.
Holl, S. (1991). Edge of a City. Princeton Architectural Pr.
Inti, I., Cantaluppi, G., & Persichino, M. (2014). Temporiuso. Manuale per il riuso
temporaneo di spazi in abbandono in Italia (Temporiuso. Manual for the temporary
reuse of abandoned spaces in Italy). Milano: Altra economia.
Koolhaas, R. (2006). Junkspace. Per un ripensamento radicale dello spazio urbano. (G.
Mastrigli, A c. Di). Quodlibet.
Purini, F. (2008). La misura italiana dell’architettura. Laterza.
Russo, A. (2018). Vuoto e Progetto. LetteraVentidue.
Távora, F. (1996). Quinas vivas:[memória descritiva de alguns episódios significativos do
conflito entre fazer moderno e fazer nacional na arquitectura portuguesa dos anos 40].
Toscani, C. (2011). L’invariante architettonico e urbano del poché. Santarcangelo di
Romagna (Rimini): Maggioli.
Toscani, C. (2012). Le forme del vuoto spazi di transizione dall’architettura al paesaggio.
Maggioli Editori.
Tschumi, B. (1996). Architecture and disjunction. MIT press.
Zennaro, P., & Sinopoli, N. (2000). La qualità rarefatta: considerazioni sull’influenza del
vuoto nella costruzione dell’architettura. Milano: F. Angeli.
Zevi, B. (2009). Saper vedere l’architettura. Saggio sull’interpretazione spaziale
dell’architettura. Einaudi. Zumthor, P. (2003). Pensare architettura. Mondadori Electa.
Zumthor, P. (1991). Atmosfere. Ambienti architettonici. Le cose che ci circondano.
Mondadori Electa.
Zucchi, G., (2016). La densità del Vuoto. Dispositivi progettuali dello spazio aperto
contemporaneo. Università di Napoli: Le Ragioni del progetto.




56                                                                                               57
                Tweaking
        retirement-living:
      Introducing design
     thinking and coffee
           bars to shared
                  lounges
                     Sam Clark
58                          59
Abstract                                                                     about their housing and how housing providers can use this information
The research presented in this paper stems from doctoral work that           to develop more appealing options. The study acknowledges that in
was undertaken between 2014 and 2018, with the aim of exploring              the last decade there has been a considerable expansion in the range of
what the homes of older people could look like in the future. The            choices available and, while there is a growing demand and requirement
underlying research context is the major societal challenge of housing       for specialist housing, it remains true that many older people do not
a ‘superaged’ UK population, and the particular needs and aspirations        move until they reach crisis point. It is important therefore to gain
of active third-agers. The research project foregrounds ‘designerly’         insight into not just what retirement housing of the future might look
modes of inquiry, resulting in design-relevant feedback for those            like, but also how good design can encourage people to plan earlier in
involved in the production of retirement-living environments. At the         order to make more proactive decisions about their housing.
core of this work is a deep inquiry into what older people consider
when making choices about their housing and how housing providers            Aspects of the doctoral research were commissioned by an industry
can use this information to develop more appealing options. The study        sponsor, referred to here as Pink & Knight, as part of a bespoke
acknowledges that in the last decade there has been a considerable           studentship arrangement, which had the qualities of contracted
expansion in the range of choices available and, while there is a            research while involving a close, yet critical collaboration in the spirit
growing demand and requirement for specialist housing, it remains true       of a Knowledge Transfer Partnership (KTP). The author is grateful to
that many older people do not move until they reach crisis point. It is      the sponsor organisation for the opportunity afforded by the PhD
important therefore to gain insight into not just what retirement            studentship, and its enlightened board of directors, which was
                                                                             open to a reflective and reflexive research process. Elements of the
housing of the future might look like, but also how good design can          research were only possible through full access to the company’s staff
encourage people to plan earlier in order to make more proactive             and customers, as well as its portfolio of retirement developments. A
decisions about their housing. Aspects of the doctoral research were         special thank you is extended to the company’s Group Land & Planning
commissioned by an industry sponsor, referred to here as Pink & Knight,      Director, who championed the research, through commissioning and
as part of a bespoke studentship arrangement, which had the qualities        facilitating introductions within the company, and bravely supporting
of contracted research while involving a close, yet critical collaboration   research by Creative Practice. As an architect, the author is particularly
in the spirit of a Knowledge Transfer Partnership (KTP). The author is       grateful for the opportunity to have pursued applied research within
grateful to the sponsor organisation for the opportunity afforded by         the construction industry, and thanks all those that participated in open
the PhD studentship, and its enlightened board of directors, which was       and candid discussions within the board room and other business
open to a reflective and reflexive research process. Elements of the         environments.
research were only possible through full access to the company’s staff
and customers, as well as its portfolio of retirement developments. A        From the outset, the research sponsor was keen to structure the project,
special thank you is extended to the company’s Group Land & Planning         anticipating a process based on defined work packages, milestone
Director, who championed the research, through commissioning and             reports and accompanying presentations, as well as regular ‘placements’
facilitating introductions within the company, and bravely supporting        within its offices. Indeed, an indicative ‘plan of study’ was written into
research by Creative Practice. As an architect, the author is particularly   the research agreement, which was further defined within the research
grateful for the opportunity to have pursued applied research within         proposal. Five work packages were determined, though in practice
the construction industry and thanks all those that participated in open     packages were scoped in turn. A significant aspect of the contracted
and candid discussions within the board room, and other business             research involved ‘designerly’ forms of post-occupancy evaluation of
environments.                                                                the sponsor’s ‘retirement-living’ product; a product that is marketed to
                                                                             customers “driven by need rather than aspiration”. Pink & Knight’s age-
Research Context                                                             exclusive developments are made up of privately owned one- and two-
The research presented in this paper stems from doctoral work that was       bedroom apartments grouped around communal facilities and services.
undertaken between 2014 and 2018, with the aim of exploring what             A typical development consists of 40 apartments in one building, or
the homes of older people could look like in the future. The underlying      ‘Chalet’, with the following features:
research context is the major societal challenge of housing a ‘super-
aged’ UK population, and the particular needs and aspirations of active         •   Concierge reception (staffed by a Chalet Manager)
third-agers. The research project foregrounds ‘designerly’ modes of             •   Shared Lounge, coffee bar and accessible toilet
inquiry, resulting in design-relevant feedback for those involved in the        •   Guest suite (for use by friends and family)
production of retirement-living environments. At the core of this work          •   Intruder alarm and CCTV entry system
is a deep inquiry into what older people consider when making choices           •   A central lift serving all floors
                                                                                •   24-hour care and support system
60                                                                                                                                                        61
     • Landscaped gardens (with raised planters and potting sheds)            Introduction
     • Free parking (including electric vehicles, cycles and mobility         I have come to know a developer’s standard product for private,
       scooters)                                                              independent retirement-living and gained insights into its design,
                                                                              production and consumption. I now appreciate the retirement chalet’s
All chalets are managed by an independent company, referred to here as        qualities, particularly its social architecture, as well as the sustainable
Chalet Management Services (CMS), which is owned by Pink & Knight.            benefits to individuals, communities and society as a whole. Nonetheless,
The management company collects the monthly service charge and is             through design review, I have questioned the quality of the architectural
responsible for all maintenance, service and ongoing management of            environments the product offers, and promoted specific design ‘tweaks’
the chalets. This accommodation model has developed over decades              that could enhance residents’ everyday experiences. I have also come
and is now becoming more widely recognised as a ‘lifestyle’ offer.            to question the very idea of so-called ‘specialist’ housing, especially
Examples can be found on the websites of the three market leaders in          products targeted at ‘older people’, given the inherent diversity and
the UK: Churchill Retirement Living, McCarthy & Stone and PegasusLife.        populous nature of this group.

Scope                                                                         In 2014 I conducted an interview with a teaching colleague with a
For the purposes of the Design Research for Change Symposium, this            background in housing, and specific project experience designing
paper reflects on the theme of design research for health and wellbeing       ExtraCare facilities, during which we exchanged some candid views on
change, and seeks to answer three questions:                                  the long-term presence and marketability of Pink & Knight’s product. The
                                                                              following extracts from the interview transcript capture my thoughts, as
     (i) who decided what to change,                                          the interviewer, reflecting on my research experience at the time:
     (ii) who activated the change, and
     (iii) who has been affected by the change?                                  “There are some things that are good about it [the Retirement
                                                                                 Chalet; particularly its social architecture], but on the whole I think
In the context of this paper ‘change’ is defined as revised or ‘tweaked’         it falls short of what I would expect of decent [‘Lifetime’] housing,
design patterns/templates for an established product. Here change has            let alone specialist housing. Actually, that term [‘specialist housing’]
a positive effect on the lived experiences of residents and their visitors,      I am not entirely comfortable with. I don’t know if we should be
as well as staff, occupying communal spaces within age-restricted                looking for specialist housing offers, or whether there just ought to
residential developments. In this context design change adds value to            be good housing that anyone can live in for as long as they like”.
an environment that promotes an independent retirement lifestyle, in
which residents can age in place, supported by a social architecture and         “It must be an incredibly niche market. This product [retirement
communal space that helps to mitigate loneliness through chances for             chalet] is not for me, it’s not for you, it’s not for my parents. It’s not
meaningful and natural interaction over coffee.                                  for [my partner’s] parents. It’s not for their [Pink & Knight director’s]
                                                                                 parents… It’s a very particular demographic that buys into this.
This paper represents something of the researcher’s story. In part it is         And, if you are [re-]selling it through an estate agent, your chances
an autoethnographic account of myself as an actor in the research field;         of success are fairly limited. I think also there must be psychological
an acknowledgement that I have played a part in the research, having             barriers for someone not coming through the sales office of [Pink
developed and performed multiple personas – research student,                    & Knight] but coming from an estate agent, and thinking, ‘What
associate, architect, lecturer – throughout the project, and sustained           is this? This isn’t an apartment, this is something else. What is this
relations with various stakeholders. It is also part sense-making of an          community? Who are these people? Are they all “old codgers”?
inquiry framed as ‘creative practice’ and involving elements of design           Are they all about to pass away? Where do I fit into this cohort?
research. Autoethnographic writing is by nature self-reflective – placing        And is it performing like a cohort; are they all ageing together or is
emphasis on the ways in which I have interacted and been immersed                there a diversity in this?’…I think it would be a hard sell [the resale
with the culture being researched (Holt, 2003; Méndez, 2013) – and               of a retirement apartment]”.
so this story has something of a ‘confessional’ quality; it refers to
regrets, paths not followed, and mistakes made, as well as some               I continue to feel at a distance from the developer and the consumers it
positive experiences and surprises, and connects these to wider cultural      supplies. As an architect I am particularly saddened by the low level of
meanings and understandings.                                                  consumer knowledge in relation to housing in the UK. I am particularly
                                                                              concerned for those older people who are moving from familiar housing
                                                                              typologies – private houses – to forms of communal apartment living, and
                                                                              not knowing what to look for in their new their home.

62                                                                                                                                                            63
     “That’s my biggest concern in all of this. You ask people about                     “Research has shown that after location, external appearance –
     the architecture and they say nothing. Then you ask them, ‘Well,                    and in particular a period style – is cited as an important priority
     what do you think about your apartment in terms of layout?                          to the vast majority of [UK] homeowners, with more respondents
     What is the bathroom like?’ Then you get pages of feedback.                         rating the importance of these aspects of their homes than the
     You think, ‘You didn’t have this knowledge prior to the purchase’.                  size, décor and quality of the rooms. Newly built homes in the
     That’s what concerns me. I do wonder… The question about the                        UK are also the smallest in Europe. Why do we value looking-at
     range of offers on the market for older people. I think in part                     over being-in?” (Horn, 2015)
     the range isn’t there because of the [lack of] knowledge; the
     discerning consumer doesn’t really exist”.                                       I am now familiar with the retirement housing sector, and a cast of
                                                                                      older person informants that presented a wide spectrum of aspirations
Of course, this is not an isolated problem, but symptomatic of a                      and needs with regard to their homes. I also have knowledge on
wider UK cultural unknowing or unthinking when it comes to housing                    the retirement chalet and understand its attractiveness and relative
design and respective property searches and purchases. Much has                       advantages to residents, as well as areas where it could be improved.
been written about this topic elsewhere. For me, the following remark                 I am also aware that I carry design knowledge – in part gathered from
from an architectural researcher describes the phenomenon rather                      resident informants – that prospective customers do not possess,
well; a problem of consuming with the eyes, rather than taking into                   though they will likely come to know, tacitly, post-purchase.
consideration issues of comfort and accommodating the whole body.
                                                                          Figure 1.
                                                                                      Design Case Study
                                                                          Lounge      The case study presents design work that was prepared for the sponsor,
                                                                          Interiors   based on the findings at one of its built developments, and later ratified
                                                                                      by studying other settings. Design was used as a method for synthesising
                                                                                      and testing emerging ideas, gathered through mixed research
                                                                                      methods and field tactics (including residency and design review). A
                                                                                      close examination of the chalet product led to the identification of
                                                                                      ‘opportunity areas’ for design review and enhancement, including the
                                                                                      shared lounge. Designs sought to work within existing frameworks –
                                                                                      grids, layouts, unit mixes, strategies, etc. – and are therefore posited as
                                                                                      potential enhancements to the standard product. Here two proposals
                                                                                      are presented, based on a case study chalet. The first proposal comprises
                                                                                      a simple remodelling or ‘tweaking’ of the existing lounge, reflecting
                                                                                      resident feedback and aspirations. The second proposal involves more
                                                                                      substantial structural alterations, albeit respects the established space
                                                                                      allocation for shared lounges.

                                                                                      The atmosphere of the typical lounge is somewhere between that of
                                                                                      a hotel lobby and a TV or day room within a nursing institution, but
                                                                                      without the nurses (Figure 1). Within the case study location the lounge
                                                                                      is one open plan space, articulated on one side by a bay window with
                                                                                      integral door leading onto a south-facing terrace. At one end the
                                                                                      room is open to the main entrance, which includes a concierge style
                                                                                      reception desk. There is a small kitchen, separated by a door at the
                                                                                      opposite end, which is primarily intended for preparing tea and coffee.
                                                                                      Appliances include a fridge, glasswasher and microwave. The lounge
                                                                                      itself has an ornamental fireplace, flat screen television, a number of
                                                                                      soft armchairs, three coffee tables and two dining tables with upright
                                                                                      chairs. The ways in which residents have appropriated the space were
                                                                                      documented through a photographic survey (Figure 2). Key features are
                                                                                      a small table by the entrance for out-going post, a folding table near
                                                                                      the reception for displaying shared books, and a puzzle table close to

64                                                                                                                                                                  65
                                                                               Figure 2.      to inherent architectural qualities of space and light. Chalet managers
                                                                               Shared         have confirmed that the same furniture and finishes can be found in all
                                                                               Lounge         the developer’s lounges, acknowledging that “they all look the same”.
                                                                               Photographic
                                                                               Survey
                                                                                              The first design proposal – ‘remodelled lounge’ (Figure 3) – shows
                                                                                              the concierge desk relocated in-between the lounge and the main
                                                                                              entrance. This would improve thermal comfort within the lounge as
                                                                                              well as reduce unwanted distractions e.g. deliveries. Some residents
                                                                                              also felt strongly about having to walk through the lounge in order to
                                                                                              reach their apartment, sensing that it was an erosion of their privacy.
                                                                                              The proposal recognises the entrance as an important public-private
                                                                                              threshold and makes provision for display space within the lobby as well
                                                                                              as seating around the reception. This area could be closed off by means
                                                                                              of a sliding door. Similarly, the chalet manager would have dedicated
                                                                                              office space that communicates with the lounge and overlooking
                                                                                              the entrance, both internally and externally. The lounge would be

                                                                                                                                                                         Figure 3.
                                                                                                                                                                         Lounge Logic




the kitchen. It’s also worth noting that there is insufficient space for all
members to attend a function at one time.

The shared lounge is a kind of default space, typically resulting from
the ‘omission’ of two residential units on plan. My studies of schematic
drawings reveal traces of a ‘plan logic’ associated with the apartments
above – the same compartment and external walls, often with a bay
projection occupied by apartment kitchens elsewhere. In these terms
the typical lounge is a kind of ‘geometrical’ or ‘empty space’ that
might be regarded representative of Henri Lefebvre’s perceived shift
in philosophical considerations of space (Lefebvre, 1991). Arguably
this way of thinking “decouples space from time, and thus also from
considerations of social life as unfolding in space” (Coleman, 2015).
Lefebvre points to an apparent gap that separates the products of
professionals from their intended inhabitants (Lefebvre, 1991). Likewise
I question to what extent the architects working for Pink & Knight
are considering future lived-experiences of the lounge spaces they
propose. It appears that design energy and budget is expended on
interior finishing – the objects that fill the ‘empty space’ as opposed

66                                                                                                                                                                                 67
articulated on two sides and moveable furniture used to subdivide into                     “shoppers’ entrance” on other Pink & Knight schemes). The proposal
a games room with fireplace, and a sitting room with the television. The                   also seeks to make better storage provision for furniture, allowing for
division could be formed by book shelving, thus accommodating the                          greater flexibility of use and multiple functions within the lounge. Pink
library that is currently laid out on a folding table by the reception. Both               & Knight are now thinking about the identity of the lounge and the
sides of the lounge would have direct communication with the outside                       potential benefits of it looking and feeling more like a coffee lounge or
by means of double doors leading onto the terrace. The sitting room                        public-facing shop. In some respects this would be a more natural or
features a coffee bar, which would better facilitate coffee mornings                       better understood venue in terms of its programme, since people have
and parties. There is still a separate room proposed for the kitchen,                      been ‘meeting for coffee’ for a greater part of their lives. Whereas how
recognising that there are times when residents would want to shut the                     and when to use a shared lounge is less clear. There is also a risk that
door on the noise of appliances.                                                           current participation depends upon the direction of the chalet manager
                                                                               Figure 4.   and therefore limited to office hours. In this way existing lounges share
                                                                               Through     the ‘day room’ image of care settings.
                                                                               Lounge
                                                                                           Analysis
                                                                                           Working with an industrial sponsor has brought many advantages in
                                                                                           terms of ease of access to a research/practice context, including a
                                                                                           portfolio of developments and population of potential informants
                                                                                           (staff and customers). Equally, the sponsor had a genuine stake in the
                                                                                           research and helped shape its scope and direction; implicitly, explicitly
                                                                                           and through latent or subliminal affect, influencing me and the research
                                                                                           informants. I can recall questions not raised or discussions unentered,
                                                                                           due to self-censorship or more general need for professional tact. For
                                                                                           instance, during my first meeting at Pink & Knight, when empathy
                                                                                           was sought from directors faced with a refused planning application
                                                                                           and appeal case, due to design challenges from the local authority
                                                                                           which appeared justified (to me). The presence of a sponsor had an
                                                                                           immeasurable impact on what could be facilitated for the research,
                                                                                           and what could be imagined for it, as well as what could be discussed
                                                                                           openly, be it in the boardroom or in public. The following extract from
                                                                                           research notes illustrates some of this tension:

                                                                                              “I’ve been to [Pink & Knight] and met various board members.
                                                                                              All appear supportive of design research, albeit ‘design’
                                                                                              defined differently. Design scope ranges somewhat across the
                                                                                              organisation, from moving windows through to alternative forms/
                                                                                              formula for retirement housing. There is an apparent tension with
                                                                                              respect to meeting their current client profile (characterised as
                                                                                              a 79-year-old widower…) and developing up-to-date ‘products’
                                                                                              for baby boomers and subsequent generations with aspiration...
                                                                                              Imagine… a profit-orientated MD, alongside resident architect-
                                                                                              directors looking to evolve a product that has remained more or
                                                                                              less the same for 20 [plus] years...”

The second design proposal – ‘through lounge’ (Figure 4) – presents a                      Perhaps my greatest struggle was reaching an influential audience
lounge that extends the full depth of the building block, though is no                     within the sponsor organisation, with regards to ‘design’. Within Pink
bigger in real terms. This has the benefits of more than one aspect and                    & Knight it appears that company architects have limited voice; their
improved access to and from both sides of the development – street                         agency being limited to project-specific challenges, as opposed to
and garden court. The primary entrance would be associated with the                        evolving the design of the standard product and its governing patterns/
garden and parking, while a secondary entrance offers more direct and/                     templates. Indeed, I would go so far as to say they have limited license
or discreet access to and from the street (the latter is referred to as the
68                                                                                                                                                                     69
to hear critique, with individual enquiries from staff suggesting that                       ‘enhancing’ existing templates, though robust evidence and cost analysis
dissemination of research findings occurred on a need-to-know basis.                         is required. Material changes, such as reviewing product specifications,
My experience is that information was filtered before travelling up and                      are more likely to come about as a matter of reflex, resulting from
down management lines. This is to be expected, since the organisation                        ‘value engineering’ or changes to the supply chain. Whereas re-
and its respective communication channels exist to efficiently and                           modelling will only occur in response to new fixed constraints, such
productively serve business objectives. Within this culture continuity                       as legislative changes to building regulations or nationally described
and certainty rule. There is little tolerance for unpredictable, resource-                   space standards. Similarly, prototyping and exploring alternative
consuming exploration and innovation. Furthermore, external comment                          models – for instance different types of sites or development strategies
is regarded as potentially disruptive, unnecessarily challenging business                    – is led by economic pressures, such as land availability and return on
intelligence (‘what we know’) and prescribed processes (‘what we do’)                        investment. Pink & Knight does not engage in polemic or speculative
and tested products (‘what sells’). In this environment, design operates                     design that disregards its established operational frameworks. In these
at the level of the development site and making the standard template                        terms the organisation is observed to be conservative in its attitude
fit. Product review, or what I regard ‘real’ design, occurs at committee                     towards design.
level.
                                                                              Figures. 5
                                                                                             In my limited experience of presenting ‘real’ design ideas to Pink &
                                                                              and 6 Design   Knight, I have observed that design change can only advance if
                                                                              Diagrams       sanctioned at the highest levels of management. Even then, an idea
                                                                                             cannot survive on architectural merit alone. For an idea to translate into
                                                                                             material change it must satisfy a business or financial case as well as
                                                                                             offer a marketable benefit (Figure 6). For instance, the introduction of
                                                                                             the coffee bar into the shared lounge represents a low-cost material
                                                                                             and spatial change, and may offer possibilities for franchising in the
                                                                                             future. The coffee bar is visually impactful and gives prospective buyers
                                                                                             an easy to digest manifestation of the lifestyle offer. It is also easy to
                                                                                             photograph and include within marketing material. Architecturally, it
                                                                                             brings the ‘tea station’ into an open plan environment, making it more
                                                                                             accessible/user-friendly, and offers new possibilities for interior design.
                                                                                             The coffee bar also supports a design narrative for ‘inhabiting’ space.
                                                                                             Of course, the biggest impact is a social one; the coffee bar offers the
                                                                                             shared lounge a familiar programme – meeting for a coffee – and goes
                                                                                             some way to ‘defeminise’ the space and make it more flexible for large
                                                                                             groups. In any case, design change is contingent on business thinking
                                                                                             and the support of directors without design training. In this respect my
                                                                                             role as ‘external architect’ involved some amount of design teaching or
                                                                                             advocacy, as well as an openness to other ways of thinking. Plus, some
                                                                                             amount of tact.

                                                                                             Within the sponsor organisation, evidence has been collated that
                                                                                             demonstrates how the research project – involving a reflective and
                                                                                             reflexive process – has affected the design evolution of the developer’s
                                                                                             standard product in a few key areas, as highlighted by a director cited
                                                                                             in a trade magazine:

                                                                                                “It’s good to have a critical look and to challenge what we
I will refer to Figures 5 and 6 to describe the design culture and activity                     do…There were suggestions as to how we could improve, for
observed at Pink & Knight. Regarding design scope (Figure 5), low-                              example in circulation improvements... [the research associate]
level design involves ‘tweaks’, such as moving elements (e.g. windows)                          came up with the idea of creating a ‘man shed’ where male
or revising non-material details. Larger design changes, such as                                residents can just potter, which is a great idea”. (Vedrickas, 2017)
revising internal layouts, may be argued on grounds of ‘rationalising’ or

70                                                                                                                                                                         71
A testimony (Figure 7) provided by a member of the sponsor’s architectural                                                                                             Figure 8.
team corroborates a change in design approach to circulation, through                                                                                                  Tea Station
consideration of ‘resting areas’, as well as general improvements in the                                                                                               (Before)
common spaces, with alternative layout arrangements being explored
for the shared lounge. The testimony confirms that future developments
will have an alternative entrance sequence, separate from the shared
                                                                             Figure 7.
                                                                             Evidencing
                                                                             Impact




                                                                                          Limitations
                                                                                          I suppose the defining characteristic of the design work is one of
                                                                                          contingency; a practice that responds to or ‘depends’ on the real world,
                                                                                          a problem articulated by Jeremy Till in his writing about the gap between
                                                                                          what architecture actually is and what architects want it to be (Till,
                                                                                          2009). If I am honest with myself, as a student I sought an opportunity to
                                                                                          design cart blanche and enjoy the production of architectural artefacts
                                                                                          for a small audience – myself and some professional peers. Whereas
                                                                                          Pink & Knight had sponsored the research, from which they expected
                                                                                          specific answers and to collect a good public relations story and an
                                                                                          independent publication for use in planning meetings and inquiries –
                                                                                          words, not designs.

lounge, and that shared lounges will feature an open plan coffee bar,                     On reflection, I now recognise that my struggle has been one of
with an accessible toilet nearby. The coffee bar has been found to be                     shifting from an imagined ideal of ‘practice-based’ research, where
especially popular with resident owners and their visitors. Figures 8 and                 creative artefacts are the basis of the contribution to knowledge, to the
9 show the physical impact of the coffee bar in terms of the spatial                      actual ‘practice-led’ situation, where the research has led primarily to
and material differences it has made to the chalet product. In older                      new understandings about practice (Candy, 2006). One might say the
developments (Figure 8) small kitchens or ‘tea stations’ were placed in                   research has been more about practice than through practice, though
bays/rooms adjacent to the shared lounge. Whereas, today coffee bars                      there have been moments where I have performed as a kind of design
are installed within lounges (Figure 9), making a positive contribution to                consultant. For instance, through the production and explanation of
the look and feel of this key space.
72                                                                                                                                                                                   73
                                                                            Figure 9.        comment. I suppose [Pink & Knight]’s view is that design is not
                                                                            Coffee Bars      the problem; it is a problem of individual personalities within
                                                                            (After)          local authority planning departments (‘this urban designer at...’).
                                                                                             I think the message is clear: ‘no more design/ideas’…”

                                                                                          The need for an invitation to design was most apparent in the way
                                                                                          feedback was framed. The abovementioned design project – produced
                                                                                          to illustrate an alternative design approach to a live Pink & Knight
                                                                                          development site – while positively received in the boardroom, was
                                                                                          regarded a ‘limited objective exercise’ that required a detailed and
                                                                                          commercial assessment. The design director found many positive
                                                                                          features though raised several points that counted against the proposal
                                                                                          when assessed as a potential Pink & Knight project. In summary these
                                                                                          matters were: an unknown six metre watercourse easement, limiting the
                                                                                          development footprint; parking spaces accessed directly off the street
                                                                                          being considered vulnerable to ‘fly parking’; a massing strategy already
                                                                                          determined through pre-planning consultation; being ‘very close’ to
                                                                                          the company’s target margin, due to the building form involving a
                                                                                          section of single sided-corridor; ‘internal’ kitchens, including those with
                                                                                          windows onto the corridor, being regarded ‘unpopular’ with customers;
                                                                                          the apartments being nearly ten per cent larger than the company’s
                                                                                          standard apartments, and respective impact on construction costs
                                                                                          and sales price. Furthermore, the live scheme had received planning
                                                                                          permission. In these terms the uptake and progression of the design
                                                                                          work was curtailed.

                                                                                          Conclusions
                                                                                          Returning to the three questions raised at the beginning of this
                                                                                          paper, I posit that design change had been affected in the context of
                                                                                          retirement-living developments, albeit modest (or maybe I had too high
sketch feasibility studies that accompanied the Product Review reports                    expectations?). The most significant design change is the revision of
prepared for Pink & Knight. Of course, taken out of context these drawn                   the design pattern/template of the shared lounge, to include a coffee
studies do not appear to represent in-depth research.                                     bar as standard. This change is already having a positive effect on the
                                                                                          lived experiences of residents and their visitors, as well as staff that
     “My ‘design’ work has been very process-led and is relatively                        manage these environments. In terms of who decided this change, well,
     light when considered in isolation. Taken out of context, the                        the authorship of an idea, and its transfer through a design process
     design work could be read as discrete feasibility studies – the                      and organisation, is never clear cut. Indeed, there could exist multiple
     sort an architectural practice would prepare quickly for an                          stories to explain what happened.
     interior refurbishment project.”
                                                                                          One thing that became clear through this work is the relative lack of
If nothing else, my take-home lesson is the need to be invited to design.                 voice for key actors regarding design decisions, including residents and
The following extract is an email account of a telephone conversation                     architects. Here the company architect was found to be shaped by a
I had with a director representing the sponsor, approaching the end of                    strong business context, multi-layered management, and clearly defined
the contracted research:                                                                  production-oriented processes designed to maximise profit. One might
                                                                                          consider, then, whether architects within development companies
     “ …There was no mention of further design work. I offered an                         are in fact ‘designers’, or if their role could be better described as
     outline scheme for [named development site], explaining how it                       ‘custodians’; persons entrusted with guarding or maintaining a design
     developed from the student work [an academic design studio I                         or set of design patterns that are shaped or tweaked to fit specific
     led] and design ideas presented within work package three. No                        development sites and contexts.

74                                                                                                                                                                      75
When explaining my research to a teaching colleague, it was suggested     References
that I was concerned with ‘cultural change’ within the sponsor company,
and to a lesser extent wider society (with respect to witnessing an       Candy, L. (2006). Practice Based Research: A Guide (Sydney: University of
aspirational baby boomer generation reach retirement). It was at this     Technology,       2006)      <https://www.mangold-international.com/_Resources/
                                                                          Persistent/764d26fd86a709d05e8d0a0d2695bd65fd85de4f/Practice_Based_
moment that I registered what it meant to evidence a design ‘tweak’       Research_A_Guide.pdf> [accessed 01 May 2019].
in the developer’s standard product; the result of ‘projecting a clear
                                                                          Coleman, N. (2015). Lefebvre for Architects, London: Routledge.
and consistent message’ in support of good design, particularly where
it ‘cannot be easily quantified or measured as potential value added’.    Holt, N. (2003). “Representation, Legitimation, and Auto-ethnography: An Auto-
                                                                          ethnographic Writing Story”, International Journal of Qualitative Methods, 2 (1), pp.
                                                                          18 – 28.
Previously I had thought of ‘success’ as being an improvement in the
                                                                          Horn, G. (2015). “The Taste for Neo-Vernacular Housing”, in Demystifying Architectural
material environment of the shared lounge within retirement chalets.      Research, Anne Dye and Flora Samuel (Eds.), Newcastle: RIBA Publishing, pp. 109 –
But the introduction of the coffee bar also represented cultural change   113.
inasmuch that it was performed by others. For this feature to appear on   Lefebvre, H. (1991). The Production of Space, Oxford: Blackwell.
the planning drawings, change had to be affected in the boardroom,
                                                                          Méndez, M. (2013). “Auto-ethnography as a Research Method: Advantages, Limitations
then communicated to and through the in-house architect team, and to      and Criticisms”, Applied Linguistics Journal, 15 (2), pp. 279-287.
the external architects that prepared the drawings. Furthermore, for it
                                                                          Till, J. (2009). Architecture Depends, London: The MIT Press.
to be materialised, the architectural idea had to be adopted, developed
and owned by multiple people at different levels of the organisation,     Vedrickas, G. (2017). “Defining the Grey Area”, Show House, July, pp. 55 - 58.
guiding it through the construction process. This is contingent design
research that affects change.




76                                                                                                                                                                 77
               Advancing
         sustainability at
     universities through
         design thinking
                education
                     Paul C. Endrejat, Amelie V. Güntner,
     Elena Stasewitsch, Pascal Abel, Simone Kauffeld and
                                 Susanne Robra-Bissantz
78                                                     79
Abstract                                                                        based learning provides suitable and realistic methods how such a
Teaching students Design Thinking (DT)—a team-based approach                    participatory approach can be taught to students.
to solve wicked problems—by using real-life sustainability problems,
provides an opportunity to develop solutions that benefit a university’s        However, the potential of problem-based learning is yet not fully applied
ecobalance. To make this suggestion tangible, this chapter includes a           in the higher education context (Leal Filho et al., 2018). To fill this gap,
case study describing how a student team, while learning DT, worked             we illustrate how Design Thinking (DT) education can be utilized as a
on the challenge to decrease the usage of disposable cups. This case            problem-based teaching method to create new sustainability concepts.
study includes the workshop preparation, the course agenda, and the             DT engages interdisciplinary student teams to experiment, prototype,
prototype BackCup, a deposit concept developed by the student team.             gather feedback, and design innovate solutions for wicked problems
Further, we illustrate how follow-up meetings with relevant stakeholders        (Brown, 2009). Such a teaching approach asks students not to be
and the collaboration with a campus do-it-yourself platform raised              passive recipients but to get involved, gather new information, and
awareness for the idea. Subsequently, we discuss how the team’s efforts         create solutions that meet users’ needs. Thus, teaching DT skills answers
to implement sustainable solutions into the university’s structures             society’s demand for creative teams who help to meet organizational
helped students to gain a better understanding of organizational                sustainability goals (Razzouk and Shute, 2012).
dynamics. Future design thinkers learned that overcoming barriers
towards sustainability requires several iterative process steps and the         To outline how DT education can be used to create solutions for
involvement of relevant stakeholders. For instructors who are interested        sustainability that fit into existing university structures, we first give an
to use a similar approach, it is explained how the DT course is integrated      overview of the concept of problem-based learning and how DT relates
into the university’s curriculum.                                               to it. Subsequently, we report a case study of a DT team that worked on
                                                                                the challenge to reduce the usage of disposable cups at their university.
Introduction                                                                    Next to a summary of the course agenda, we also elaborate on how the
Earth overshoot day, the annual date when humanity has used as many             collaboration with a project partner, a do-it-yourself campus platform,
resources, as the world is able to renew, is antedated each year. In            helped to gain support for the prototype developed by the DT team.
2019, it was July 29, which underlines that human’s usage of resources          Finally, we discuss the implications that can be drawn from this case
exceeds by far what the planet is able to repair. To tackle this issue, we      study and lay out how further studies might increase our understanding
need new and innovative ways to change behaviors within organizations           about how to diffuse sustainable innovations into university structures.
and raise awareness for sustainable consumption on the one hand. On
the other hand, it is important to educate the next generation of leaders       Approach: Design thinking as a problem-based learning method
to balance economic growth, social development, and ecological                  Problem-based learning encourages critical thinking, decision making,
vitality. In this regard, universities take a critical role, not only because   and the ability to determine the critical aspects regarding a given topic
they educate these upcoming leaders but also because they provide a             what, in turn, fosters an exploratory mindset in learners (Melles et al.,
context in which newly developed sustainable concepts can be tested             2015). DT can be understood as a specific way of problem-solving that
before they are transferred to larger society. Although this potential          asks students to consider the interests of the project partners as well
has been recognized (e.g., Sulkowski, 2017), concrete suggestions how           as the people affected by a solution and incorporate these interests
a campus’ sustainability could be enhanced are sparse (Disterheft et            into their solution. Thus, DT has the potential to be an approach that
al., 2012). Thus, we need tangible designs how sustainability can be            grasps the complexity and unpredictability of social structures because
implemented into university curricula.                                          the points of view from all involved stakeholders are simultaneously
                                                                                integrated in the process of designing a solution (Leifer and Steinert,
Amongst the most crucial barriers that prevent the implementation               2014). In doing so, DT builds upon action research (Lewin, 1947), an
of sustainable innovations into organizational structures are a lack of         iterative plan making and fact gathering approach for understanding
support from management and a lack of appropriate technology (Ávila             and changing behavior. Confronted with a complex challenge or
et al., 2017). Nonetheless, given the urgency to create sustainable             problem, a DT team adopts a user-centered perspective to understand
solutions, waiting till these issues are resolved by structural changes         how the behaviors of organizational members can be channeled in a
is not an option (Tarrant and Thiele, 2016). Instead, we need creative          desired direction (Gruber et al., 2015). Thereby, it uses a predefined,
solutions that circumvent these barriers and work in the existing               iterative process that results in concepts or affordances (i.e. artifacts
parameters (Hill and Wang, 2018). One way to do so is by relying on             that depict a desired human-object interaction; Norman, 2013) with
participatory design interventions that involve those individuals that          a strong emphasis on the user perspective. The inclusion of potential
are expected to behave more sustainable into the problem-solving                users is necessary because credible and feasible solution strategies
process (Disterheft et al., 2015; Endrejat and Kauffeld 2018). Problem-         are only developed in collaboration with the affected stakeholders

80                                                                                                                                                              81
and do not arise form ideas developed by a lone genius. During               Workshop preparation: DT as a key skill
this learning process, the role of an instructor is not, as in traditional
                                                                                                                                                       Figure 1.
teaching methods, to use top-down communication in a teacher-like
                                                                                                                                                       Overview of
manner but rather to become a facilitator. That means, instead of giving                                                                               the design
information and pointing out possible solutions, the facilitator provides                                                                              thinking
an environment in which students can engage with self-determination                                                                                    process.
in the solution process of real-world problems.

Furthermore, both action research and DT propose that a final solution
is not attained through a linear process but rather iteration and
feedback loops are necessary to integrate new insights. The iterative
process applied in DT is a modification to classical problem-based
learning approaches that rely on predefined and successive working
steps. Another aspect that distinguishes DT from other problem-based
learning approaches is that DT not only focuses on how a problem could
                                                                             At Technische Universität (TU) Braunschweig (Germany), DT is integrated
be solved but puts equal emphasis on the aspects causing the problem
                                                                             into the elective soft-skills curriculum. These courses are three-day
and the factors stabilizing the current status (Razzouk and Shute, 2012).
                                                                             workshops for students from all disciplines who receive course credit
In other words, in DT understanding the problem is of equal importance
                                                                             for their participation. These heterogeneous teams are a promising
as creating a solution. Instead of diligent analyzes and planning, there
                                                                             approach to work on a complex problem and due to divergent
is a bias towards action. This is because, finding the correct answer for
                                                                             perspectives also requires members to develop their communication
the wrong question is eventually a waste of resources. Thus, a DT team
                                                                             skills to function in interdisciplinary teams (Ávila et al., 2017).
is encouraged to use the iteration steps to experiment which solutions
might go in a direction that satisfies users’ needs. This trial-and-error
                                                                             In accordance with the problem-based learning approach, we provide
procedure requires a safe-to-fail, pragmatic experimentation climate
                                                                             students not just with hypothetical challenges. Instead, we have
(Tarrant and Thiele, 2016).
                                                                             developed various cooperations to introduce projects with real “pain
                                                                             points” that create an authentic learning environment in which students
A complex, ill-defined challenge suitable to teach students DT would be
                                                                             can gain the competencies to solve real-life challenges by creating
to help a university becoming more sustainable (Kopnina, 2017; Shapira
                                                                             a client-based project (Foster and Yaoyuneyong, 2016). The project
et al., 2017). For instance, most students spend few thoughts to their
                                                                             partner for the cup challenge was Sandkasten (German for Sandbox), a
consumption and waste, and when confronted with the consequences
                                                                             campus do-it-yourself platform whose goal is to shape a campus that
of their doing, many react with resistance (Savageau, 2013). Thus, we
                                                                             aligns with users’ needs. Sandkasten enables organizational members
illustrate how DT can be applied to meet organizational sustainability
                                                                             not only to express their ideas but also helps them in realizing these
goals on reducing the usage of disposable cups by integrating the
                                                                             ideas.
perspectives of cup users.
                                                                             DT workshop: Teaching students to work in interdisciplinary teams
Case study: How might we reduce the usage of disposable cups?                Our three-day DT training concept is based on the field guide to human
In Germany, there is an annual usage of 2.8 billion disposable cups
                                                                             centered design (IDEO, 2015) that consists of the three process phases
causing massive environmental problems (Deutsche Umwelthilfe, 2015
                                                                             inspiration, ideation, and implementation. In the next paragraphs, we
[Environmental Action Germany]). The negative environmental impact
                                                                             explain the goal of each phase and what the DT team has accomplished
of disposable cups is mirrored by the fact that even the eco-friendliest
                                                                             during these process steps.
one-way cup is two times worse for the environment than the most
unsound reusable cup (Pladerer et al., 2008). Given these numbers,
                                                                             Inspiration: What are users’ key needs? The first day began with an
there is a clear need to find a solution that does not forbid coffee or
                                                                             input from the course facilitator about the DT mind-set and several
tea drinkers to consume their beverages but does ‘nudge’ them away
                                                                             short exercises to make students familiar with the DT working mode.
from the purchase of disposable cups. Taking these requirements into
                                                                             Subsequently, the group of fifteen participants got divided into three
consideration, we set up a DT workshop to let students work on this
                                                                             interdisciplinary teams, each working on a different challenge. For the
complex real-life-challenge and generate solutions that meet users’
                                                                             sake of readability, we only focus on the cup project.
needs and simultaneously help them to contribute to a more sustainable
university. The whole process is depicted in Figure 1.

82                                                                                                                                                               83
The team first reframed the challenge, meaning, they discussed how they     Follow-up meetings: Is there potential to bring the idea to life?
could rephrase the task to make it more tangible. This step considers       The final prototype, BackCup, is a reusable cup system that does not
that concepts like ‘sustainability’ are usually too abstract to be worked   require to pay a deposit or wait in a queue. BackCup has a special bin
on thoroughly (Kopnina, 2017). Afterwards, the facilitator provided an      design, formed as a long tube with printed cups on its top (see Figure
input about several methods that could be applied to collect insights       2 for an image of the BackCup prototype). These inscriptions avoid
of users’ or stakeholders’ perspectives, respectively. For the remainder    misuse as the new bins are placed closely to nearest garbage bins. Like
of the first day and the beginning of the second day, each team split       regular garbage bins, BackCup should be emptied regularly.
up into two sub-groups to conduct ‘field research’, using interviews or
                                                                                                                                                      Figure 2.
observational methods. These activities consider that change agents                                                                                   BackCup
should be able to ask appropriate questions to grasp and understand                                                                                   prototype
the viewpoints of the involved stakeholders. While interviewing the
student office, the team learned that the TU Braunschweig has a usage
of 150.000 disposable cups per year, which underlined the relevance of
the challenge.

Ideation: How to create solutions to meet users’ needs? Following field
research, the two sub-groups got together and shared their learnings
and observations with each other. In a next step, the team had to select
the most important insights that they gained during field research.
These were: 1) users value the to-go experience, 2) users hesitate to
bring their own cups with them, since this is perceived to undermine
flexibility, 3) many users consume their beverage not far from the
location of purchase, and 4) most users consume their beverages within
the next 15 minutes after purchase. Follow-up questions regarding why
the users that consume within or near the cafeteria hesitate to utilize
reusable cups revealed that queuing up again to regain the deposit
or having not enough money for the pledge are the major hindrances
against reusable cups.

To make these insights more tangible, the students created a persona,
which represents behavioral and motivational aspects of target users
(Veryzer and Borja de Mozota, 2005). The key needs of this persona
were rephrased into ‘How to…’ questions, such as “How to design the
usage of reusable cups as effortless as the usage of disposable cups?”
Through brainstorming sessions, the DT team created several creative
ideas how these questions could be solved. The most promising ideas
were elaborated further and transferred into prototypes.

Implementation: Turning an idea into an innovation.
At the beginning of the third day, the DT team tested their ideas
by sharing the prototypes with potential users to gather feedback.
The refined final prototype was presented to representatives from
Sandkasten. This presentation summarized the process and insights
that led to the final concept. Feedback from the project partner and
from other DT teams was structured using special feedback sheets
which provided the opportunity to add ideas on how the concept could
be enhanced further. The workshop ended with an overall reflection
about the learning experiences and newly acquired skills.


84                                                                                                                                                                85
To ensure that BackCup has the potential to become realized at the           Discussion
TU Braunschweig, the DT team and representatives of Sandkasten               This chapter described a case study on how to develop innovative
had several meetings to discuss how they want to proceed further             ideas to reduce the usage of disposable cups at a university campus
and clarified the next process steps. Since the prototype also requires      through problem-based learning approaches. It thereby adheres to
acceptance and support by the cafeteria staff, the team had meetings         the call to create new approaches and methods that take account for
to take these concerns into consideration and involve this critical          the transformative nature of implementing sustainable strategies. By
stakeholder group at an early stage (Tarrant and Thiele, 2016). For          using DT education, we build on Herbert Simon’s (p. 111) bon mot that
instance, the staff suspects that the bins will be soaked. This additional   “everyone designs who devises courses of action aimed at changing
information led to to the printed cups along the tube. These should          existing situations into preferred ones”. Applying this approach
prevent users from putting their cups up-side down into the tube.            provides students with the opportunity to gain real-life competencies
Confronted with the question how the idea could be financed, the DT          that they can use in other organizations to solve complex issues (Barth
team developed a business plan based on the idea that the BackCup            et al., 2007).
stands could be used as advertising spaces.
                                                                             We highlighted DT as an innovative and problem-based teaching
Campaign design: How to raise awareness and acceptance for the               method that fits into a university’s curriculum and aims to develop both
prototype                                                                    students’ professional and interpersonal competencies. In the course
As a do-it-yourself campus platform, Sandkasten provides a website           of the DT training, students were encouraged to not only focus on the
which is a participative tool for campus projects. The idea to make          functional goal to reduce waste production, but also to tap into users’
processes as transparent as possible and integrating users’ feedback         emotional spheres and gain empathy for their personal needs. Further,
to increase the chances that prototypes become innovations (Leifer           our DT training provides an example of how universities can integrate
and Steinert, 2014). To promote their idea among students and staff,         the topic of sustainability into courses that are usually unrelated to
the DT team designed an online campaign, which required that 500             this topic. This aims at creating a connection in the minds of students
organizational members gave the idea their “Like” to proceed with            between the subject in question and sustainable development
BackCup. This quantitative mechanism aims to ensure that a prototype         (Sammalisto and Lindhqvist, 2008).
is supported by a critical mass before resources are invested in its
realization (Sammalisto and Lindhqvist, 2008)                                Theoretical and Practical Implications
                                                                             The case study demonstrates that establishing collaboration between
Manage the campaign: Gain further support from potential users               a DT team and a project partner with actual “pain points” can provide
The duration of the online campaign was set to one month, but within         innovative solutions for a real-world scenario. While working on such
five days the idea was supported by 500 fans that was the target number      issues, a team becomes motivated to learn and apply DT in a self-
to start with the realization of the BackCup idea. To stay connected with    determined manner. By providing a challenge that affects a whole
their fans and get further feedback, the DT team posted updates of the       organization, students learn that complexity increases exponentially
project’s progress. Furthermore, fans were also able to join and support     when several stakeholders with divergent interests are involved (Flood,
the project, e.g. by providing their expertise.                              2010). In doing so, the students also acquired the competencies to
                                                                             cope with ambiguity: in a first step they learn to make a problem more
Project application: Interweave the prototype into organizational            tangible, so it can be worked on. Subsequently, they experience how
structures                                                                   it feels like when there is no predefined way towards a solution but
A DT team needs to consider an organization’s culture to ensure an           how new information continuously impacts the process (Leifer and
implementation and acceptance of the innovation (Michlewski, 2016).          Steinert, 2014). By asking students to integrate their prototype into
Coping with these aspects is necessary to educate students to become         the organizational structures, they also learned other key skills such as
change agents who are dealing with the complexities of sustainability and    creating a business plan or communicating with organizational members
‘soft’ issues in organizational change management. Thus, Sandkasten          in a way that those support the developed solution.
offered the DT team access to the university’s institutional network and
enabled a meeting with the staff of the university cafeteria company. By     Our educational concept can be used as an innovative teaching method
making their project public via the online campaign, the team received       in other universities and for other challenges. For instance, at the TU
cooperation offerings from the elected student representatives, NGOs         Braunschweig, DT teams also work on other sustainability projects,
like Greenpeace, and a reusable-cup-company. Currently, the BackCup          such as redesigning the allocation of office spaces to reduce energy
team works on the laundry cycle and prototypes the return mechanism.         consumption, a challenge provided by the facility management. Such
                                                                             ideas and concepts are also in line with—and support—broader efforts

86                                                                                                                                                       87
such as The United Nations Sustainable Development Goals (Leal Filho             suitable approach to improve existing management practices (e.g. team
et al., 2017a; Leal Filho et al., 2015). These goals include that the insights   meetings, job crafting) related to organizational change (Güntner et al.,
resulting from sustainability research are used by practitioners, such           2019). Motivational interviewing, as a solution focused communication
as understanding complexity as well as critically questioning systems,           approach aligns well with the optimistic and constructive DT mind-set.
policies and routines that appear fundamentally unsustainable (Leal              It emphasizes that people are not likely to embrace changes when
Filho et al., 2015; Barth et al., 2007). We provided several ideas how           these are imposed on them. Instead, motivational interviewing rests
to contribute towards these goals by building on the beneficial effects          on exploring individuals’ motives by using specific communication
of problem-based learning approaches as the theoretical foundation.              methods such as open questions, reflective listening, and affirmations.
By using the DT approach, practitioners can engage users to take                 These basic competencies serve to understand others’ needs, build up
part in the solution process, turning it into a bottom-up, participative         interpersonal trust, and help users co-create which aspects of an idea
method, rather than imposing changes top-down (Disterheft et al.,                would enhance their motivation to change their routines (Miller and
2012). Moreover, by involving students and letting them reflect on the           Rollnick, 2013). Therefore, we argue that teaching DT teams motivational
difficulties of how to motivate users to behave more ‘greenly’, our course       interviewing communication methods would answer previous calls for
educates future change agents to promote sustainability (Svanström et            expanding designers’ empathic horizon to create innovations that meet
al., 2012). In teaching a DT mindset, students are encouraged to work            users’ needs.
collaboratively, think critically, and apply systemic thinking which fosters
the empowerment of students.                                                     Furthermore, the DT team worked on the challenge to reduce the
                                                                                 usage of disposable cups at their university. This is a narrow and
For universities that intend apply our approach and incorporate                  specific problem definition, as the team did not further question
DT in their course curricula, we have three recommendations: First,              fundamental assumptions related to the issue of today’s disposable
qualified facilitators familiar with the DT approach and group dynamics          food and beverage culture as a general societal issue. Therefore, we
are needed to guide students through the DT process. Second,                     think it would be interesting to see in how far a more experienced DT
universities should ensure the DT training can easily be integrated into         team would take a more holistic perspective when the goal is to cut out
the curricula. An extracurricular course program helps to ensure that            single-use cups and re-define the challenge to tackle a problem’s core.
they work in interdisciplinary teams. Third, an institutional cooperation
network provides students to work with project partners that have real           Conclusions
‘pain points’. In this way, students do not operate with hypothetical            Aligning a course agenda towards solving sustainable issues while
challenges but interact with stakeholders who need to be involved in             preparing students to become change agents in a complex world is
the process. A do-it-yourself platform that supplies the resources and           an efficient way to approach environmental and educational goals. As
expertise to follow-up with an idea might be an optimal basis for such           an idea how to use these synergies, we described how a student team
a collaboration.                                                                 that learned DT created a prototpye (BackCup) to reduce the usage of
                                                                                 single-use cups at the TU Braunschweig.
Limitations and further course advancement
As TU Braunschweig’s infrastructure was an important driver to foster
the realization of BackCup, we cannot distinguish, whether project
progress was due to the good idea and dedicated team members
or the resources and support provided by Sandkasten. Nonetheless,
previous research shows that the way in which intended change is
communicated is important for its success (Ford et al., 2008). Thus,
an appropriate communication with organizational members that are
affected by new ideas is critical to enhance the probability that DT
projects become realized. Such an extension of the DT approach seems
necessary, as thus far, DT does not fully unfold its potential to produce
innovations (Arnold, 2017). Therefore, we encourage future research
to consider combining DT education with motivational interviewing,
“a collaborative conversation style for strengthening a person’s own
motivation and commitment to change” (Miller and Rollnick, 2013,
p. 12) to advance DT projects. Whereas motivational interviewing
originates from substance abuse treatment, it has been suggested as a

88                                                                                                                                                           89
References                                                                                      Leal Filho, W., Azeiteiro, U., Alves, F., Pace, P., Mifsud, M., Brandli, L., Caeiro, S.S.
                                                                                                and Disterheft, A. (2017a), “Reinvigorating the sustainable development research
                                                                                                agenda. The role of the sustainable development goals (SDG)”, International Journal of
Arnold, M. (2017), “Fostering sustainability by linking co-creation and relationship            Sustainable Development & World Ecology, Vol. 25 No. 2, pp. 131–142.
management concepts”, Journal of Cleaner Production, Vol. 140, pp. 179–188.
                                                                                                Leal Filho, W., Manolas, E. and Pace, P. (2015), “The future we want”, International
Ávila, L.V., Leal Filho, W., Brandli, L., Macgregor, C.J., Molthan-Hill, P., Özuyar, P.G. and   Journal of Sustainability in Higher Education, Vol. 16 No. 1, pp. 112–129.
Moreira, R.M. (2017), “Barriers to innovation and sustainability at universities around the
world”, Journal of Cleaner Production, Vol. 164, pp. 1268–1278.                                 Leal Filho, W., Pallant, E., Enete, A., Richter, B. and Brandli, L.L. (2018), “Planning
                                                                                                and implementing sustainability in higher education institutions. An overview of the
Barth, M., Godemann, J., Rieckmann, M. and Stoltenberg, U. (2007), “Developing key              difficulties and potentials”, International Journal of Sustainable Development & World
competencies for sustainable development in higher education”, International Journal            Ecology, Vol. 4 No. 15, pp. 1–9.
of Sustainability in Higher Education, Vol. 8 No. 4, pp. 416–430.
                                                                                                Leifer, L.J. and Steinert, M. (2014), “Dancing with ambiguity. Causality behavior, design
Brown, T. (2009), Change by Design: How Design Thinking Creates New Alternatives for            thinking, and triple-loop-learning”, in Gassmann, O. (Ed.), Management of the Fuzzy
Business and Society, Collins Business, New York, NY.                                           Front end of Innovation, Springer, Cham, Germany, pp. 141–158.
Deutsche Umwelthilfe [Environmental Action Germany] (2015), “Coffee to go-                      Lewin, K. (1947), “Frontiers in group dynamics II. Channels of group life; social planning
Einwegbecher – Umweltauswirkungen und Alternativen: Hintergrundpapier der                       and action research”, Human Relations, Vol. 1 No. 2, pp. 143–153.
Deutschen Umwelthilfe. [Coffe to go-disposable mugs – Effects on the environment
and alternatives]”, available at: http://www.duh.de/uploads/tx_duhdownloads/DUH_                Melles, G., Anderson, N., Barrett, T. and Thompson-Whiteside, S. (2015), “Problem
Coffee-to-go_Hintergrund_01.pdf (accessed 23 May 2018).                                         finding through design thinking in education”, in Blessinger, P. and Carfora, J.M. (Eds.),
                                                                                                Inquiry-based Learning for Multidisciplinary Programs: A Conceptual and Practical
Disterheft, A., Azeiteiro, U.M., Leal Filho, W. and Caeiro, S. (2015), “Participatory           Resource for Educators, Emerald Group Publishing Limited, Bingley, UK, pp. 199–209.
processes in sustainable universities – what to assess?”, International Journal of
Sustainability in Higher Education, Vol. 16 No. 5, pp. 748–771.                                 Michlewski, K. (2016), Design Attitude, Routledge, New York, NY.
Disterheft, A., Ferreira da Silva Caeiro, S.S., Ramos, M.R. and Azeiteiro, U.M. (2012),         Miller, W.R. and Rollnick, S. (2013), Motivational interviewing: Helping people change,
“Environmental Management Systems (EMS) implementation processes and practices                  Applications of motivational interviewing, 3rd ed., Guilford Press, New York, NY.
in European higher education institutions – Top-down versus participatory approaches”,          Norman, D.A. (2013), The Design of Everyday Things, Basic Books, New York, NY.
Journal of Cleaner Production, Vol. 31, pp. 80–90.
                                                                                                Pladerer, C., Meissner, M., Dinkel, F., Zschokke, M., Dehoust, G. and Schüler, D. (2008),
Duch, B.J., Groh, S.E. and Allen, D.E. (Eds.) (2001), The Power of Problem-based                “Vergleichende Ökobilanz verschiedener Bechersysteme beim Getränkeausschank
Learning: A Practical “How to” for Teaching Undergraduate Courses in any Discipline,            an Veranstaltungen [Comparing the ecobalance of different mug systems during
Stylus Pub, Sterling, VA.                                                                       events]“, available at: www.oeko.de/publikationen/p-details/vergleichende-oekobilanz-
Endrejat, P.C. and Kauffeld, S. (2018) “Motivation towards ‘green’ behaviour in the             verschiedener-bechersysteme-beim-getraenkeausschank-an-veranstaltungen (accessed
workplace: facilitating employee pro-environmental behaviour through participatory              23 May 2018).
interventions”, in Wells, V., Gregory-Smith, D. and Manika, D. (Eds.), Research Handbook        Razzouk, R. and Shute, V. (2012), “What is design thinking and why is it important?”,
on Employee Pro-Environmental Behaviour, Edward Elgar Publishing, Cheltenham, UK,               Review of Educational Research, Vol. 82 No. 3, pp. 330–348.
pp. 267–286.
                                                                                                Sammalisto, K. and Lindhqvist, T. (2008), “Integration of sustainability in higher
Flood, R.L. (2010), “The relationship of ‘systems thinking’ to action research”, Systemic       education. A study with international perspectives”, Innovative Higher Education, Vol.
Practice and Action Research, Vol. 23 No. 4, pp. 269–284.                                       32 No. 4, pp. 221–233.
Ford, J.D., Ford, L.W. and D’Amelio, A. (2008), “Resistance to change: the rest of the          Savageau, A.E. (2013), “Let’s get personal. Making sustainability tangible to students”,
story”, Academy of Management Review, Vol. 33 No. 2, pp. 362–377.                               International Journal of Sustainability in Higher Education, Vol. 14 No. 1, pp. 15–24.
Foster, J. and Yaoyuneyong, G. (2016), “Teaching innovation. Equipping students to              Shapira, H., Ketchie, A. and Nehe, M. (2017), “The integration of design thinking and
overcome real-world challenges”, Higher Education Pedagogies, Vol. 1 No. 1, pp.                 strategic sustainable development”, Journal of Cleaner Production, Vol. 140, pp. 277–
42–56.                                                                                          287.
Gruber, M., Leon, N. de, George, G. and Thompson, P. (2015), “Managing by design”,              Simon, H.A. (1996), The Sciences of the Artificial, 3rd ed., MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 58 No. 1, pp. 1–7.
                                                                                                Sulkowski, A.J. (2017), “University experiential learning partnerships as living laboratories
Güntner, A.V., Endrejat, P. C. & Kauffeld, S. (2019). Guiding change: Using motivational        for sustainability”, in Arevalo, J.A. and Mitchell, S.F. (Eds.), Handbook of Sustainability
interviewing within organizations. Gruppe. Interaktion. Organisation. Zeitschrift für           in Management Education: In search of a Multidisciplinary, Innovative and Integrated
Angewandte Organisationspsychologie, Vol. 50 No. 2, pp. 129–139.                                Approach, Edward Elgar, Cheltenham, UK, 433-453.
Hill, L.M. and Wang, D. (2018), “Integrating sustainability learning outcomes into a            Svanström, M., Dobson, H.E. and Bland Tomkinson, C. (2012), “Creating sustainable
university curriculum”, International Journal of Sustainability in Higher Education, Vol.       development change agents through problem-based learning”, International Journal
31 No. 1, p. 15.                                                                                of Sustainability in Higher Education, Vol. 13 No. 3, pp. 263–278.
IDEO (2015), The Field Guide to Human-Centered Design, IDEO, San Francisco, CA.                 Tarrant, S.P. and Thiele, L.P. (2016), “Practice makes pedagogy – John Dewey and
Kopnina, H. (2017), “Sustainability. New strategic thinking for business”, Environment,         skills-based sustainability education”, International Journal of Sustainability in Higher
Development and Sustainability, Vol. 19 No. 1, pp. 27–43.                                       Education, Vol. 17 No. 1, pp. 54–67.
                                                                                                Veryzer, R.W. and Borja de Mozota, B. (2005), “The impact of user-oriented design on
                                                                                                new product development. An examination of fundamental relationships”, Journal of
                                                                                                Product Innovation Management, Vol. 22 No. 2, pp. 128–143.

90                                                                                                                                                                                              91
         Design meets
         neuroscience:
      Future directions
        for developing
     and implementing
         design probes
          Melanie Flory and Ninela Ivanova
92                                      93
Abstract                                                                        mindset which is at the very heart of user experience design. A case in
The frontiers of design and neuroscience are rapidly shifting as a              point that is directly relevant to the theme of this paper is how design
result of recent advances in neuro-technologies, and the pivotal role           and neuroscience define and think about probes.
user experience design plays across a wide range of analogue and
digital applications at individual, community, and global level. These          Design Research or Research Design?
applications range from learning and education interventions to                 Design and neuroscience as disciplines with their respective
innovation of large-scale healthcare options. Every day new frontiers           distinguished and experienced practitioner communities, view and
are forged as neurobiologists and cognitive scientists look beyond the          relate to probes with discipline-related understanding that includes
mere structure-function neuronal correlations of thought, emotion, and          differences and commonalities. In designing and presenting probes to
behaviour. This has direct impact for design research and design-led            a specific population, our approach has been to:
probe development. Translating this growing evidence-base through
a mind well-trained in critical, rigorous, and creative thinking, and an           • Embrace the added levels of complexity that emerge in any
attitude of equitable collaboration and mutual respect, heralds immense            multidisciplinary research or collaboration (Flory & Ivanova, 2019);
potential for unfolding ground-breaking design probe applications                  • Explore conflicting perspectives (Hooper et al., 2013), and;
through the intersection of neuroscience and design.                               • Strive to create pathways that lead to rich user experience
                                                                                   by interweaving the methodological approaches, underlying
Introduction                                                                       philosophical and scientific perspectives, and research and practice
In 1999 when Bill Gaver and colleagues put together a variety of cultural          culture that inadvertently influence and drive research, design and
probes for presentation to a group of ten elderly residents of the small           intended outcomes (Flory & Ivanova, 2019).
village of Peccioli in Italy, their intent was to gather “inspirational data”
(Gaver Dunne & Pacenti, 1999, p.21) through provoking, inspiring,               Beginning with definitions, an often-quoted definition of design
engaging, and assisting participants via probe artefacts, to share their        research which includes the application of probes in design research, is
thoughts, ideas, feelings, desires and lived experience of being an             that of Jane Fulton Suri (2008, p. 54):
elderly resident of that town. This creative endeavour in engagement
design came about in response to a European Union funded research                  “Design research both inspires imagination and informs intuition
call to develop technologies that would facilitate increased presence              through a variety of methods with related intents: to expose
of the elderly in their local communities. These beginnings and                    patterns underlying the rich reality of people’s behaviours and
subsequent applications of design probes in varying contexts ranging               experiences, to explore reactions to probes and prototypes, and
from experience of living with dementia (Wallace et al., 2013), to                 to shed light on the unknown through iterative hypothesis and
dealing with bereavement (Massimi & Baecker, 2011), establish context,             experiment.”
i.e., the bigger picture, the ground, the soil, the zeitgeist so to speak,
as the primary and preceding factor that gives meaning, purpose and             Fulton Suri’s definition of design research includes the words “research”,
value to design probes and designing probes.                                    “imagination” and “intuition” in the same sentence. This is an anomaly
                                                                                in terms for the scientist whose research training is in controlling as
Given that context is the seed from which the process of developing             many variables as possible that might “interfere” with the research
and designing probes begins to sprout and grow highlights the need to           aim and objectives. Has the scientific landscape shifted at all from this
clarify the cross-disciplinary underpinnings of this paper.                     paradigm? In the last two decades, design research has been steadily
                                                                                gaining recognition and application in some areas of scientific research
Ours is a multidisciplinary partnership – a space – in which design             and application (Sandoval, 2014). It is however, referred to by terms such
and neuroscience intersect to innovate and create pathways to better            as, “design-based research” and “design experimentation” (Sandoval
experiences and improved futures for individuals and organisations. On          and Bell, 2004). For the science community, this terminology ensures
a day-to-day basis we live the experience of the 2016 Design Research           that design research, i.e., design discipline research methodology, is
Society’s (DRS) future-directions call for “rigorous interdisciplinary          not confused with the systematic scientific methodology of “research
collaboration” (Atkinson & Rae Oppenheimer, 2016, p.2) between                  design”.
designers and members of other disciplines.
                                                                                The role of design research has been especially appreciated and
In practical terms this means developing a mutual respect and openness          applied in the learning sciences where designers work with educational
to central concepts, ideas, insights, methods, practices, and vagaries          psychologists to innovate novel and creative environments and
of each other’s discipline. These are also qualities of an empathetic           approaches to learning, problem solving, improved memory and

94                                                                                                                                                           95
focused attention in the classroom and other formal teaching and             the aim of expanding the role of design research and design probes in
learning settings (Anderson and Shattuck, 2012). Thus, through design        scientific enquiry, clinical applications, and subjective wellbeing. This
interventions that are developed for real-life educational contexts,         is demonstrated through the Emo-TTM and SwatchathinkingTM probes
learning research scientists and educational psychologists are able          the authors developed and applied in 2015 (Flory & Ivanova, 2016), and
to develop relatable and usable theories of education, training and          continue to do so, in a variety of circumstances.
learning. The cross-pollination of design thinking with its attending
                                                                                                                                                         Figure 1.
research methods and processes have been pioneering pathways to                                                                                          Neuroscience
fulfilment of the DRS’s call for interdisciplinary collaboration and co-                                                                                 for Design
creation via multidisciplinary project teams in the field of educational                                                                                 Model 1
psychology.

In educational research, the remit of scientist and designer differ. In
the case of design probes, the overall design thinking, methods and
processes adopted by the designer is guided by the question, “what
effect am I looking for on user thinking, behaviour and experience?”
(Penuel & Frank, 2016). User experience in the context of the classroom
is therefore the conceptual basis for designer engagement, innovation
and creativity in this case. Beyond the remit of learning science however,
user-centred design probes that enable positive experiences through
creative activities have been introduced in a diverse range of contexts
and projects addressing the needs of vulnerable populations such
as the elderly (Mattelmäki, 2003), the deafblind community (Ivanova,
2015), survivors of domestic violence (Clarke et al., 2013) and vulnerable
women in secure hospital settings (Thieme et al, 2013). Hannington’s
Human-Centred Design Model (2003) succinctly sums up the design
probe and probe design approach as creative, participative, visual,
requiring cognitive, emotional and behavioural engagement of both
the designer and the user, in order to extract and yield understanding
of patterns, themes, affinities, aversions, and other cognitive and
behavioural responses.

In scientific disciplines ranging from earth and space science to
biological life sciences, probes are designed technologies used
primarily for collecting information and data. Twenty-first century
space probes, DNA probes, neural probes – and an ever-growing list –         P.R.O.B.E.S.
are all technology-based innovations aimed at detecting, diagnosing,         When we the authors met in 2014, Ivanova was in the writing up phase
decoding, mapping, measuring, and monitoring patterns, connections,          of her doctoral research. The pivotal objective was to introduce a
anomalies, changes, and activities of their host. Probes in their own        wearable probe – in this case a globally recognised garment – the T-shirt
wake contribute to developing and expanding the scientific research          – to advance engagement and understanding of challenging concepts
and knowledge base. They play a major role in developing solutions           related to novel materials and sensory experience (Ivanova, 2015).
to current and recurring problems, predicting outcomes, and informing        Flory, who had founded MindRheo in 2010 had been developing and
future scenarios planning (Flory, reflective journal, 2014 - 2019).          delivering neuroscience-based workshops and training tools aimed at
Blending the best features of design research and design probes              stimulating brain plasticity for personal and organisational development
with research design and research-based outcomes of design and               and advancement. She was also exploring innovative and novel ways
neuroscience respectively, has led Flory to establish Neuroscience for       to enrich the learning experience, growth of self-awareness, sense of
Design Worldwide (NfDW) – a consultancy wherein the integration of           agency , and other personal and organisational transformative change
neuroscience and design is focused on raising the potential to design        components of her practice. The design probe with its empathetic
creatively and efficiently for human health, happiness, behavioural          user-centred approach to engagement, personal context, and guided
change and user experience (MindRheo, 2019). This multidisciplinary          exploration (Mattelmäki, 2003; Wallace et al., 2013; Ivanova, 2015),
model of practice and application depicted in Figure 1 is about fulfilling   she felt, was the perfect fit for purposive and strategic activation of
96                                                                                                                                                                97
brain plasticity in a range of personal and organisational transformation                    the first design probe – the Emo-TTM – which we developed in 2015.
projects. Over the last five years Flory and Ivanova have collaboratively                    A fuller exposition of the Emo-TTM appears in the section entitled
researched, designed, developed and delivered a number of design                             Multidisciplinary Beginnings.
probes aimed at improving emotional intelligence, subjective wellbeing,
sense of agency, and cognitive and emotional reframing.                                      Mapping the people and user experience context through this simple
Design meets Neuroscience which is a lived experience in                                     but effective method gives clarity regarding two central themes of “user
multidisciplinary working and collaborative design for us, has yielded                       group” and “user experience” remits for the designer, and direction
a six-component design probe model depicted below (Figure 2). It                             to the scientist regarding the evidence base to consult and draw from.
captures the planning, research and operational phases and processes
in our development of design probes.                                                         Six-Component Process Model for Developing Design Probes
                                                                                             The six-component PROBE mapping exercise is in effect, a blueprint for
                                                                            Figure 2.        developing design probes. Similar to an architect’s plan, this mapping
                                                                            Six-compo-       model (Figure 4) provides an at-a-glance design brief for the probe.
                                Purpose                                     nent process     It’s the blueprint against which both designer and neuroscientist can
                                                                            model for        exchange and blend their ideas, knowledge, expertise and efforts to
                     Sample                  Research                       developing
                                                                                             optimise – in this case – user engagement and experience, in utilising
                                                                            design probes
                                                                                             imagination to expand emotional intelligence and emotion regulation.
                                 PEOPLE

                                CONTEXT                                                                                                                                  Figure 4.
                                EXPERIENCE                                                                                                                               Six-Compo-
                                                                                                                                                                         nent Process
                   Essentiate                 Orient                                                                                                                     Model
                                                                                                                                                                         derived from
                                                                                                                                                                         developing
                                 Blend                                                                                                                                   the Emo-T™
                                                                                                                                                                         Probe


Context
Tennant (2017), a palaeontologist, defines the term context in the
context of research, as “The circumstances that form the setting
for an event, statement, or idea, and the terms of which it can be
understood.” In terms of design, Esser (2019) advises that “it is
essential to understand users and the context in which they will use
your design.” These perspectives demonstrate agreement between
the scientist and designer that research, design and implementation
are all primarily rooted in context. An example of the context mapping,
which is presented in Figure 3, shows the initial mapping exercise for

                                                                            Figure 3. Con-
                                                                            text of Design
                                                                            Research /
                                                                            Probe            The value of design probes which are a synthesis of empathic
                                                                                             inquiry, creative play and iteration, in collaboration with cutting-edge
                                                                                             psychology and neuroscience, has exponentially added value in
                                                                                             provoking and precipitating human cognitive, emotion, and behaviour
                                                                                             changes at personal and organisation level. Neuroscience for its
                                                                                             part, must rise to a better understanding of the potential for design
                                                                                             – of a building, healthcare service, or crime reduction intervention, for
                                                                                             example – to influence and engage human beings (Flory & Ivanova,
                                                                                             2019). Our experience in adopting an agile, inclusive, multidisciplinary

98                                                                                                                                                                                 99
approach that is a willing sharing for the betterment of the user, is one                          • in post-workshop settings where participants were required to
of the future directions that applies equally to design and designers,                               wear the probe in day-to-day settings such as cafés and at work,
and neuroscience and neuroscientists.                                                                and note down any responses and engagement with it by the
                                                                                                     public;
Contextual Beginnings: The T-probe                                                                • in enabling the research and the wider design community to
The contextual underpinnings of our multidisciplinary collaboration                                  engage with novel ways of thinking about fashion materials and
in developing design probes began with Ivanova’s doctoral research                                   design;
project. It is an essential component in the storytelling of our history                          • in scoping ways for probes to be implemented within stakeholder
together of design probes and probe design.                                                          engagement and education;
In her fashion-based research inquiry, Ivanova (2015) chose the T-shirt                           • in advancing understanding of fashion-led probes.
– which she later termed “the T-probe” – to explore participant
engagement and response to novel materials and related sensory                                                                                                               Figures 7 to
experience. The following two sections provide examples of the inquiry                                                                                                       11. Deafblind
in practice.                                                                                                                                                                 participants
                                                                                                                                                                             creating their
                                                                                                                                                                             T-shirts with
Novelty and User Experience                                                                                                                                                  support from
In relation to novel materials such as fungi-based textiles as an emerging                                                                                                   communica-
proposition for sustainable fabrics, the challenge was two-fold: novelty,                                                                                                    tion guides.
and negative associations such as decay and deterioration, e.g., with                                                                                                        Techniques
moulds (Figures 5 and 6). These cognitive associations and attitudinal                                                                                                       included
mindset would have to first be overcome in order for such types of                                                                                                           textile col-
                                                                                                                                                                             lage, image
materials to be introduced successfully and ethically in the future of
                                                                                                                                                                             transfers,
high street culture.                                                                                                                                                         and direct
                                                                             Figure 5 and                                                                                    painting /
                                                                             6. A ‘Mouldy’                                                                                   drawing onto
                                                                             T-shirt                                                                                         the fabric.
                                                                             designed by
                                                                             a research
                                                                             participant
                                                                             and then
                                                                             worn in social    The literature on design probes revealed very few examples of fashion-
                                                                             situations.       led, or ‘wearable’ probes, which could fulfil the above intentions. Such
                                                                             The T-probe       probes often address technologies and experiences that appear foreign
                                                                             was used          and within the realm of science fiction (Philips, 2006; Philips, 2008). In
                                                                             to engage
                                                                                               considering how design probes of such speculative value could be
                                                                             participants
                                                                             creatively with   developed within a methodological framework, the practice of designers
                                                                             mould-based       Helen Storey and Becky Earley appeared more closely aligned with the
Sensory Experience of Inclusion                                              designs by        intentions of the research. Storey’s Field of Jeans (Story & Ryan, 2012),
In relation to fashion experience, a group of six young adults with dual-    transposing       and Earley’s 5 Ways and Top 100 projects (Earley and Fletcher, 2003;
                                                                             the ‘raw’         Earley, 2014) evidenced the potential of everyday, ubiquitous garments
sensory (deafblind) and cognitive impairment, a user group who are
                                                                             engagement        such as jeans, scarves and shirts, in creating platforms for discussion
currently not catered for in mainstream fashion, were introduced to the      with mould-
experience of choosing one’s own clothing (Figures 7 -11).                                     and engagement, and eliciting a shift in attitude and perception. The
                                                                             based visual
                                                                                               wearability of such garments provides an accessible point of reference
                                                                             stimuli to
The research aimed to test whether the T-probe could be applied with         designing         to a wider research demographic. Their everydayness presents a
agility to fulfil a range of design and research intentions at various       an actual         relatively culturally neutral ground for discussing novel and complex
points of engagement throughout the project, e.g.:                           garment that      ideas. Additionally, their replicability and customisability can be quickly
                                                                             they would        employed as a blank canvas for the development, exchange, and
                                                                             wear in social    communication of ideas.
      • in participatory workshops, to elicit engagement and gather
                                                                             situations.
      participant feedback and response;

100                                                                                                                                                                                    101
Therefore, the research required a probe that:                                 these findings as an exciting new opportunity for incorporating creative
                                                                               and novel ways of addressing the EI component of her clinical and non-
      • could be worn by a diverse demographic;                                clinical practice which includes workshops, learning and development,
      • was culturally familiar, yet versatile, customisable, and capable of   and organisational consultancy.
      operating within a wide range of social situations;
      • was aesthetically simple and neutral, and could serve as a ‘blank      Together, Flory and Ivanova’s mutual appreciation for the agility of the
      canvas’ or framework for the exploration of new ideas;                   T-shirt as a probe in a variety of participant engagement settings, led to
      • would elicit imaginative engagement;                                   a series of brainstorm, discussion, and futures-thinking sessions which
      • fulfilled both a research intention to study user perception, and      resulted in the co-creation of the Emo-T™ probe.
      the design intention to advance understanding and engagement.
                                                                               As they bounced and blended ideas and discipline-related knowledge
      “Identity, community, difference, gender, sexual preferences,            and expertise, they were convinced that a T-shirt probe would be an
      political affiliations, humor, corporate slogans, support for            apt item for developing self-awareness and practical learning of EI.
      causes, product endorsements, religious beliefs, profundities,           Flory’s expertise in neuroplasticity, which is the innate flexibility of the
      athletic teams loyalties, school and college links, travel trophies      brain to form new neural connections throughout life in response to
      – T-shirts say it all.” (O’Connor, 2010)                                 new learning and behaviours, resonated with Ivanova’s use of probes to
                                                                               change perception, behaviour and mindset.
The ‘humble’ T-shirt, which is universally worn around the globe, and
has been historically used as a bridging mechanism to address a variety        The resulting Emo-T™ probe is a creative, fun, relatable, and inclusive
of challenging topics, e.g., in political and environmental campaigning,       way for people across different continents and demographics to
in advertising and activism (Talbot, 2013), fulfilled all of the above and     feel connected as they collectively learn and train in cultivating and
was a natural choice as best fit for this research.                            nurturing specific positive emotions and felt-experience (Figures 12
                                                                               and 13). Evoking and regulating emotion for personal wellbeing and
During the course of this research enquiry (2011 – 2015) Ivanova had           health, we envision, could become a personal practice and art through
gained invaluable knowledge and practice in contextual alignment and           creative and intelligent design and application of this and other probes,
sourcing, and developing relevant materials and artefact-fit to context.       which we continue to develop.

                                                                                                                                                              Figures 12
Multidisciplinary Beginnings: The Emo-T™                                                                                                                      and 13. The
Emotional intelligence (EI) was a term first used by Salovey and Mayer                                                                                        Emo-T™
in 1990 to describe the human ability to master one’s own emotions and                                                                                        probe used
understand and influence the emotions of others. Over the last three                                                                                          in a group
decades much has been written and researched on the subject resulting                                                                                         setting to
in evidence-based applications for clinical and non-clinical settings.                                                                                        stimulate and
These include a diverse a range of subjects from post-traumatic stress                                                                                        elicit specific
disorder (PTSD) and depression, to political negotiation and marketing.                                                                                       positive
                                                                                                                                                              emotions
Prior to these authors meeting each other, Flory, whose client base
included combat-related PTSD survivors had repeated clinical
experience of military personnel “putting on a brave face” and “carrying
on as normal” whilst supressing feelings of sadness, alienation,
insecurity, fear, and lack of identity. This was in direct contradiction       The Emo-T™ probe is rooted in the neuroscience (Barrett, 2011 and
to the popular belief and EI discursive theory that quoted consistent          2017) of emotion and inclusive design thinking and practice. It’s
alignment between outward expression and behaviour and internal                a probe that flips the design-to-provoke-emotion concept used in
emotional experience. To Flory’s relief, EI research carried out in Dr         marketing and moviemaking, to emotion-inspired design. The aim
Barrett’s lab (2011, 2017) at Northwestern University in Illinois, resulted    is to engage and activate creative imagination related to a positive-
in the categorical statement: “we have misunderstood the nature of             feeling emotion, e.g., joy or excitement, which in turn creates a “felt
emotions for a very long time.” Through a series of studies, Barrett           response”. Research by leading neurologists and neuroscientists are
and colleagues discovered that face and body language which are                increasingly uncovering the role that specific emotions and feelings
taken for granted to gauge emotion in ourselves and others, are not as         such as empathy, joy, and gratitude play in decision-making, creative
straightforward and reliable as they are alleged to be. Flory interpreted      thinking, positive self-image, leadership ability, and personal and
                                                                               professional accomplishments. In our workshops, using the Emo-TTM
102                                                                                                                                                                      103
probe, participants are able to evoke and memorise their experience of                            Co-creating and developing the Emo-T™ probe with a designer
positive feeling social interaction or wellbeing emotions.                                        (Ivanova) has been a novel and freeing-up experience for Flory (2017).
                                                                                                  Departing from the traditional experiment, data collection, analysis and
The Emo-T™ is a paper or cardboard T-shirt which “probes” participants                            interpretation practice within scientific enquiry, and putting personal
into visualising and imagining that the T-shirt is a self-designed wearable                       experience at the centre of the research aim and design has brought
emotion. In “wearing” an emotion of their choice, i.e., one they wish                             new insights about the importance of personal experience and meaning,
to experience, practice, and express through creative media, the brain                            and the symbiosis between positive self-expression and self-agency.
registers the information and stores the memory for recall at a later
time.                                                                                             SwatchaThinking™: The Reframe Probe
                                                                                                  Texture is ubiquitous and a major portion of the sensory input that we
Using creative imagination to evoke a wellbeing emotion, participants                             receive every day (Liu et al, 2015). Touch and texture perception cause
express their internal experience through designing the T-shirt via                               sensory receptors in the fingers and hands to send information signals
drawing, writing and other artistic media. This creative exercise can                             up the arm which results in corresponding patterns of activation in the
take 5 to 10 minutes from start to finish which is an important factor in                         brain. Human beings interpret this as sensation.
ensuring emotion-memory retention for future recall. More importantly,
participants come to recognise that they have a distinctive felt sense                            Exploration, discovery and coming to sensory conclusions about the
related to a specific emotion. This is like a unique signature.                                   world we live in through touch and texture perception begins in early
                                                                                                  childhood. Toddlers explore their world through hands-on sensory
It is not uncommon for participants to report that a particular bodily                            engagement. This learning continues into adulthood. Sensory
sensation that they had been associating with fear or anxiety, is now                             information stored away in memory from childhood and current lived
recognised and understood as positive anticipation and excitement.                                experiences determine attraction and avoidance preferences with
This personal understanding and cognitive reframe not only bears out                              accompanying emotion-based responses. Social media capitalises on
Barrett and colleagues’ findings (2011), but more importantly, it has                             these responses through the emoji culture.
expanded the user’s EI repertoire and ability to self-regulate emotion
through recall and association. Maintaining a visual journal of these                             Flory had been mulling over the possibility of texture perception and
T-shirts helps participants to conjure up the emotion instantly through                           association with cognitive and emotion reframe during the course of her
visual association.                                                                               work with PTSD survivors for over a decade. The idea of rekindling and
                                                                                                  evoking the early childhood instinct for play and exploration through
The Emo-T™ has been well-received in the boardroom, classroom,                                    positive-feeling touch periodically surfaced from the ignored recesses
leadership, branding and sustainability workshops to date. Our                                    of her mind. Ivanova’s tacit knowledge of the sensory qualities and
intention is to collate a million Emo-Ts which will become a design                               feel of materials accumulated through formal education and practice in
portfolio demonstrating the emotion-expression-design connection,                                 fashion and textiles was essential in translating these ideas and insights
whilst also serving as an artistic global platform for future education                           from neuroscience into a palette of fabric swatches to be used as tactile
and training in the development of EI. We call this project the Emo-T™                            stimuli to reframe cognition and emotion. Over a period of several
Global Wall.                                                                                      months spanning 2015 and 2016, the SwatchaThinking™ probe was
                                                                                                  born.
                                                                              Figures 14 to 16.
                                                                              Participatory en-
                                                                                                  Ivanova, choosing a variety of fabrics with varying texture, weight,
                                                                              gagement with
                                                                              the emotional
                                                                                                  drape, temperature and so on, set up a user-experience design grid
                                                                              experience of       of textile materials. Together, the designer and the neuroscientist
                                                                              “confidence”,       began to ideate the engagement-association effect of these materials
                                                                              having reported     on emotion and thought. The SwatchaThinking™ probe (Figures 17
                                                                              a previous emo-     and 18), nudges participants to engage with the various textures in the
                                                                              tional experi-      swatch to reframe thoughts and feelings about topics and areas in their
                                                                              ence of “chaos”     life that generate feelings of frustration or stagnation. The self-learning
                                                                              in relation to
                                                                                                  and training through voluntary engagement helps in developing new
                                                                              academic perfor-
                                                                              mance
                                                                                                  understanding, new perceptions, and better emotional experience.




104                                                                                                                                                                             105
                                                                               Figures 17 and      technologies and designer-led applications ranging from encouraging
                                                                               18. Participants    environmental awareness (Gaver et al., 2013) to mobile health
                                                                               engaging with       interventions (Poole, 2013) have placed both these disciplines at the
                                                                               the Swat-
                                                                                                   centre of the ever-expanding Industry 4.0 world we live in.
                                                                               cha-Thinking™
                                                                               probe at a
                                                                               Company “fu-        Every day new frontiers are forged as neurobiologists and cognitive
                                                                               tures-thinking”     scientists look beyond the mere structure-function neuronal correlations
                                                                               workshop. Image     of thought, emotion, and behaviour. Understanding this growing
                                                                               courtesy of Ezzi-   evidence-base through a mind well-trained in critical, rigorous, and
                                                                               din Alwan.          creative thinking heralds immense potential for ground-breaking
                                                                                                   applications and multidisciplinary collaboration.         In adopting a
                                                                                                   translational approach in sharing knowledge and cutting-edge research,
                                                                                                   and embracing an equitable stakeholder attitude in multidisciplinary
After four successful trials, the probe continues to be well received and                          endeavours, scientists can significantly increase the potential for creating
used by participants to reframe aspects of thinking and emotion about                              and implementing innovative, novel and mitigating solutions to global
topics ranging from the personal to the global.                                                    problems and crises ranging from hunger and nutritional deprivation,
                                                                                                   to the worldwide increase in recurring or early onset ill health problems
A documented example of the SwatchaThinking™ probe in action is                                    expressed through coronary disease and depression. Designers have a
that of a female entrepreneur struggling to bridge the gap between                                 major role to play in this futures direction agenda. At the heart of the
bootstrapping and competing against her “betters” for funding                                      designer mindset and focus is empathy-driven user engagement and
investment.      She reported battling feelings of loneliness – an                                 the “experiencer” who is best informed to provide the key for scientists
experience that often accompanies early start-ups. She was asked                                   and designers to develop ideas, insights, hypotheses, pathways, and
to choose a material in the swatch the “feel” of which was a good                                  quantum leaps that result in positive changes and improvement.
fit for her emotions. Beginning with the fear-evoking thought of
“there’s no money in the bank” and associating this thought with the                               Proliferating the knowledge transfer “space” with inter- and
tactility of coarse-grit abrasive sandpaper, she progressively shifted to                          multidisciplinary workshops, research, think tanks, conferences and
softer fabrics like cotton and silk chiffon. With this fabric came new                             expert panels is an essential in the way forward for design research.
thinking (“Actually, I have enough to get by”) that then progressed to                             Building and strengthening communities of people actively engaged
personal, professional, and global insights about money, monetisation,                             in multidisciplinary research and design, collaboratively addressing key
investment, and so on. This entrepreneur thus began an organic process                             issues and possible solutions, building bridges that remove barriers
of reframing her relationship with money and the creative leadership                               to understanding and cooperation between disciplines is no small
her business demanded.                                                                             task. The authors endeavour to do this through their collaborative
                                                                                                   partnership.
Strategic reframe can remain a purely intellectual exercise in a clinical
or therapeutic setting. True internal shift begins with a shift in emotional                       Charles T Munger, the world-renowned investor and businessman
association which is then expressed through new behaviours and habit                               considers multidisciplinary partnerships the key to successful outcomes.
formation. Reversing a top-down reframe approach through using                                     Munger’s words (2005) succinctly summarise our own experience of
touch to identify where one is, and then identifying a new texture or                              working together:
texture range that one wishes to arrive at in their lived-experience,
begins the reframe process of “changing one’s mind.”                                                  “If you skilfully follow the multidisciplinary path, you will never
                                                                                                      wish to come back. It would be like cutting off your hands.”
Our research, design and implementation efforts on                      the
SwatchaThinking™ probe continues to progress and evolve.                                           Although we’re still in the early stages of the Design meets
                                                                                                   Neuroscience paradigm, every day reveals new opportunities and
Design Meets Neuroscience: Future Directions                                                       potential for complementary and compatible intersection between the
The frontiers of design and neuroscience are shifting at a rapid pace                              two disciplines. Cognitive and affective neurosciences in particular
every day as these disciplines continue to evolve, expand the remit                                have the capacity to inform and clarify design-related decisions
of their applications base, and form cross- and multidisciplinary teams                            involving emotions, mental associations, and affective response. In
and partnerships across the globe to develop better futures and new                                this way the “empathise and experiment” approach is fulfilled through
experiences for people and communities. Recent advances in neuro-                                  multidisciplinary exchange.
106                                                                                                                                                                               107
References                                                                                     Liu, J., Lughofer, E., and Zeng, X. (2015) Aesthetic Perception of Visual textures: A
                                                                                               holistic exploration using texture analysis, psychological experiment, and perception
                                                                                               modelling. Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience, 9, 134. Accessed 12 May 2019:
Anderson, T., and Shattuck, J. (2012). Design-based Research: a decade of progress in          https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fncom.2015.00134/full.
education research? Educational Researcher, 41 (1), 16-25.
                                                                                               Marshall, K., Thieme, A., Wallace, J., Vines, J., Wood, G., & Balaam, M. (2014). Making
Atkinson, H., and Rae Oppenheimer, M. (2016). Design Research History: history, theory,        wellbeing: A process of user-centered design. In DIS 2014 - Proceedings of the 2014
practice: histories for future-focused thinking. In “Future-Focused Thinking.” 50th            ACM SIGCHI Conference on Designing Interactive Systems (pp. 755-764). ACM.
Anniversary Conference (27-30 June 2016) of the Design Research Society, Brighton,             https://doi.org/10.1145/2598510.2600888.
UK.
                                                                                               Massimi, M., and Baecker, R.M. (2011). Dealing with death in design. In Conference
Barrett, L. F. (2011). Was Darwin Wrong About Emotional Expressions? Current                   Proceedings on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI) 2011 “Connecting” in
directions. In Psychological Science, 20, 400-406.                                             collaboration with the First ACM European Computing Research Congress. (pp. 1001-
Barrett, L.F. (2017). How Emotions are Made: The secret life of the brain. Houghton            1010).
Miffin Harcout, New York.                                                                      Mattelmäki, T. (2003). Taking User Centred Steps with Probes. In Proceedings of
Clarke, R., Wright, P., Balaam, M., and McCarthy, J. (2013). Digital Portraits: photo-         INCLUDE Conference. RCA, London. Retrieved from: https://shop.aalto.fi/media/
sharing after domestic violence. In Proceeding on Human Factors in Computing                   attachments/55d58/mattelmaki.pdf.
Systems (CHI) 2013 “Changing Perspectives” in collaboration with the First ACM                 MindRheo. (2019). Neuroscience for Design Worldwide (NfDW). Retrieved from https://
European Computing Research Congress. (pp. 2517-2526).                                         mindrheo.com/nfd-worldwide/.
Earley, B. (2014). Upcycling textiles: A digital sketchbook for the top 100 project. http://   Munger, C.T. (2005). Poor Charlie’s Almanack: The wit and wisdom of Charles T Munger.
www.upcyclingtextiles.net/about/.                                                              Wisconsin, USA: Donning Company.
Earley, B., & Fletcher, K. (2003). 5 ways: Updatable. http://5ways.info/docs/projects/         O’Connor, K. (2010). ‘How Smart Is Smart? T-shirts, Wellness, and the Way People Feel
update/projects.htm.                                                                           about “Medical” Textiles’, Textile, 8 (1), 50-67.
Esser, P. (2019). Probes for Context Mapping: how to design and use them. In Interaction       Penuel, W.R. and Frank, K.A. (2016). Modes of Inquiry in Educational Psychology and
Design Foundation Blog. Published 8 May 2019. Accessed on 10 May 2019: https://                Learning Sciences. In Corno, L. and Anderman, E.M. (Eds.), Handbook of Educational
www.interaction-design.org/literature/article/probes-for-context-mapping-how-to-               Psychology. (pp. 16-28). New York: Routledge.
design-and-use-them.
                                                                                               Philips. (2006). SKIN: Dresses. http://www.design.philips.com/about/design/
Flory, M. & Ivanova, N. (2019). ‘Future Directions: Design meets Neuroscience’. dmi:           designportfolio/design_futures/dresses.page (Accessed 4 September 2015).
review, 30(2), 22-29. doi: https://doi.org/10.1111/drev.12177.
                                                                                               Philips. (2008). Fractal ‘Living jewelry’, new provocation of the Philips design probe
Flory, M. (2019). Reflective Journal: Day Entry 2nd January.                                   team.       http://www.newscenter.philips.com/main/design/about/design/designnews/
Flory, M. (2017). Reflective Journal: Day Entry 13nd July.                                     pressreleases/pressbackgrounders/fractal_living_jewelry.wpd (Accessed 4 September
                                                                                               2015).
Flory, M. & Ivanova, N. (2016). ‘The Emo-T Global Wall: Design and emotion or emotion-
led design?’. In Proceedings to the 10th International Conference on Design & Emotion:         Poole E. S. (2013). HCI and Mobile Health Interventions: How human-computer
Celebration and Contemplation, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. (pp. 734-743).                      interaction can contribute to successful mobile health interventions. Translational
                                                                                               Behavioral Medicine. 3 (4), 402-405.
Fulton Suri, J. (2008). Informing Our Intuition: design research for radical innovation.
Rotman School of Management Magazine, Winter 2008. (pp. 53-58), Toronto, Canada.               Salovey, P. and Mayer, J.D. (1990). Emotional Intelligence. In Imagination Cognition and
                                                                                               Personality. 9 (3): (pp. 185- 211).
Gaver, W., Bowevers, J., Boehner, K., Boucher, A., Cameron, D.W.T., et al (2013). Indoor
Weather Stations: Investigating a Ludic approach to environmental HCI through batch            Sandoval, W. (2014). Conjecture Mapping: An Approach to Systematic Educational
prototyping. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing             Design Research. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 23 (1), 18-36.
Systems (CHI ‘13). ACM, New York. (pp. 3451-3460).                                             Sandoval, W. A., and Bell, P. (Eds.). (2004). Design-based research methods for studying
Gaver, B., Dunne, T., & Pacenti, E. (1999). Design: Cultural probes. Interactions, 6(1),       learning in context. [Special issue]. Educational Psychologist, 39 (4), 199-201.
21-29.                                                                                         Talbot, S. (2013). Slogan T-shirts: Cult and culture. London: Bloomsbury.
Haggard, P., Eitam, B. (Eds.) (2015). The Sense of Agency. New York: Oxford University         Tennant, J. (2017). Why Context is Important for Research. In ScienceOpen Blog dated:
Press.                                                                                         29 Sep 2017 Accessed on 10 May 2019: http://blog.scienceopen.com/2016/05/why-
Hanington, B. M. (2003). Methods in the Making: a perspective on the state of human            context-is-important-for-research/.
research in design. Design Issues, 19 (4), 9-18. MIT Press.                                    The catalytic clothing story. Storey, H. and Ryan, T. (Directors). (2012).[Video/DVD].
Hooper, C.J., Millard, D., Fantauzzacoffin, J., and Kaye, J. (2013). Science vs. Science:      Thieme, A., Wallance, J., Johnson, P., et al. (2013). Design to Promote Mindfulness
the complexities of interdisciplinary research. In Conference Proceedings on Human             Practice and Sense of Self for Vulnerable Women in Secure Hospital Services. In
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI) 2013 “Changing Perspectives” in collaboration               Proceeding on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI) 2013 “ChaUpnging
with the First ACM European Computing Research Congress. (pp. 2541-2544) https://              Perspectives” in collaboration with the First ACM European Computing Research
doi.org/10.1145/2468356.2468825.                                                               Congress. (pp. 2647- 2656).
Ivanova, N. (2015). The T-Probe: a fashion-led approach to advance understanding of            Wallace, J., Wright, P., McCarthy, J., Green, D., Thomas, J. and Olivier, P. (2013). A
novel and challenging material concepts and sensory experiences (PhD thesis). Kingston         Design-led Inquiry into Personhood in Dementia. In Conference Proceedings on Human
University London.                                                                             Factors in Computing Systems (CHI) 2013 “Changing Perspectives” in collaboration
                                                                                               with the First ACM European Computing Research Congress. (pp. 2883-2884).

108                                                                                                                                                                                       109
       The ontological
      nature of design:
      Prospecting new
       futures through
          probabilistic
            knowledge
          Fernando Galdon and Ashley Hall
110                                    111
Abstract                                                                        and evaluation, finally, design uses modelling, pattern-formation and
As design thinking evolves we are beginning to develop a clearer idea of        synthesis.
its relationship to other domains of thinking and in particular its specific
ontological nature. Here we consider design’s special relationship to the       In terms of the values of each culture, the sciences aim for: objectivity,
future and how concepts of anticipation, probabilism and prospectivity          rationality, neutrality, and a concern for ‘truth’, whereas, in the
underpin a new understanding of design’s relationship to cross-domain           humanities the aim is for: subjectivity, imagination, commitment, and a
collaboration potential. In effect we discuss how design cares for the          concern for ‘justice’. Finally, in design practitioners aim for: practicality,
future of transformation in an era where rapidly advancing technologies         ingenuity, empathy, and a concern for ‘appropriateness’ (Cross, 1982,
via exponential technological developments are challenging human-               pp. 221-222).
machine interactions. Probabilistic knowledge emerges as an
ontological reality for addressing the intrinsically abductive nature of        Archer proposed design as a third way of knowing in 1978, however,
future design research. Ultimately this approach implies a different form       this proposition was previously presented by Aristotle in the form of
of knowing and aims to position design research as the discipline better        productive knowledge in several works (Physics, Nicomachean Ethics,
prepared for addressing the future.                                             Rhetoric and Metaphysics) more than two thousand years earlier.
                                                                                Productive knowledge is defined by Aristotle as “identical with a state of
Introduction - The ontology of design                                           capacity to make, involving a true course of reasoning” (Nicomachean
Design approaches have been compared to and categorised among                   Ethics 1140a10-16). In this type of knowledge, the “origin” resides “in
the sciences, arts and humanities. For instance, Snow (1959) defined            the maker and not in the thing made” (Nicomachean Ethics 1140a10-
the separation of the domains of knowledge into the sciences and arts           16). Like practical knowledge, prospective knowledge deals with what
and humanities. However, the design discipline can be seen as having            can be “otherwise”. However, practical and productive knowledge
its own distinct way of understanding the world. In classic Greece,             have different goals.
Aristotle classified knowledge into three categories: the theoretical,
the practical and the productive (Atwill, 2009, pp. 165-166). Therefore,        In practical activities such as ethics, politics or art, goals are directed
positioning productive disciplines such as design in its own dedicated          toward the end. Whereas, productive practices are directed towards
practice, distinctive from the aforementioned sciences, arts and                means, and knowledge is neither in the user, nor the producer. In
humanities. Design’s intrinsic approach based on planning, solution-            this paradigm, neither of them is capable of determining productive
based problem solving, problem shaping, synthesis, preparedness,                knowledge (Nicomachean Ethics 1140a11-13). It is defined by an act
readiness and appropriateness in the built environment determines a             of exchange (Metaphysics 1033a24-26). Which always redefines the
different way of knowing.                                                       subjects involved by effecting a shift in power and status. This type of
                                                                                knowledge resides in its transformational capabilities. It is concerned
In this context, Archer (1978) went some way to proposing design as             with competing standards of value rather than securing boundaries of
the third culture of thinking fulfilling Snow’s challenge to ‘fill the vacant   knowledge. Its ontology is indeterminate as it is based on potentialities
plot’. Cross developed this further in his seminal paper Designerly ways        or alternative possibilities (Rhetoric 47;7357a4-5). Things that can be
of knowing building on Archer’s work at the Royal College of Art. He            otherwise. It cannot transcend time as it depends on time, circumstances
describes a third culture as:                                                   and contexts, therefore past, present and future exist. Knowledge is
                                                                                always “outside itself” residing not in the “product” but in the use
      ‘…the collected experience of the material culture, and the               made by a receiver or audience. It is defined by an act of exchange. It
      collected body of experience, skill and understanding embodied            has no external arbiter and no final judge. Only users and makers who
      in the arts of planning, inventing, making and doing’. (Cross,            change with exchange. It is transformational in nature.
      1982, p. 221)
                                                                                This lack of historical research beyond design may have prevented
In the process, Cross differentiated design from the sciences and               Cross from proposing why there is a dichotomy among scientific
humanities by comparing the terms of different kinds of phenomena               and humanistic knowledge and why design, as an embodiment of
studied in the three cultures; the sciences focus on the natural world, the     productive knowledge has been out of the picture. Atwill, building
humanities on human experience and design on the man-made world.                on Ball’s (1977) critique of theory/practise opposition argues that in
He also differentiated among the appropriate methods to approach                the 19th and 20th centuries the “post-enlightenment perspective of
each ‘culture’. The sciences use controlled experiments, classification         knowledge fostered the binary opposition of theory and practice, which
and analysis, while the humanities use analogy, metaphor, criticism             only further obscures the place of Aristotle’s (productive) knowledge”
                                                                                (Atwill, 1998, p. 163)

112                                                                                                                                                              113
Additional contemporary arguments can be found in Lawson differences          this context, the deductive becomes limited by access and abductive
among scientist and designers/architects;                                     reasoning aspects becomes more dominant, prevalent and necessary.

      “the scientists focused their attention on discovering the rule,        Design’s intrinsic prospective approach, based on planning, solution-
      the architects were obsessed with achieving the desired result.         based problem solving, problem shaping, synthesis, preparedness,
      The scientists adopted a generally problem-focused strategy             readiness and appropriateness in the built environment determines a
      and the architects a solution-focused strategy.” (Cross, 1982 p.        different manner of knowing. In this scenario the designer is neither a
      223)                                                                    scientist nor a sociologist as they are projecting what is yet to be known.
                                                                              Therefore, knowledge cannot be empirical nor observational, but as
In this context, the scientist does not have a client and architects cannot   Aristotle stated; transformational. Consequently, its output is based on
work without a client. As described by Aristotle; knowledge is in the         potentialities not certainties. In the same way that anthropology is not
exchange and not at the end result. Furthermore, the designer’s role          about facts, but approximations which are updated as new information
demands to ‘go beyond’ what already exist. This ontological demand            emerges. As Glanville proposed, ’knowledge for’ future action and
differs significantly from science. Building from Levin:                      transformations rather than ‘knowledge of’ past actions and events
                                                                              (Glanville, 2005). This position connects to John Chris Jones’s statement
      “The designer knows (consciously or unconsciously) that some            above (1992. p. 10). In this context, as the life of the intervention is
      ingredient must be added to the information that he already has         placed into the future, the time to assess the impact of the design is
      in order that he may arrive at a unique solution. This knowledge        extended during its lifetime and forever bounded to its environment. In
      is in itself not enough in design problems, of course. He has           this context, validation is always a posteriori, and the proposed output
      to look for the extra ingredient, and he uses his powers of             becomes the main element to be assessed. This intrinsically argues that
      conjecture and original thought to do so”. (Cross, 1982 p.224)          knowledge in design is probabilistic in its nature.
                                                                                                                                                            Figure 1.
Another fundamental element that is missing in Cross’s analysis is its                                                                                      Knowledge
temporality or timeframe interventional positioning. In this area John                                                                                      and time.
Chris Jones, one of the first design science theorists postulated in his                                                                                    Fernando
seminal book Design Method that design was different from the arts,                                                                                         Galdon (Gal-
sciences and mathematics. In response to the question ‘Is designing an                                                                                      don, 2019).
art, a science or a form of mathematics?’ Jones responded:

      “The main point of difference is that of timing. Both artists and
      scientists operate on the physical world as it exists in the present
      (whether it is real or symbolic), while mathematicians operate
      on abstract relationships that are independent of historical time.
      Designers, on the other hand, are forever bound to treat as real
      that which exists only in an imagined future and have to specify
      ways in which the foreseen thing can be made to exist.” (Jones,
      1992. p. 10)                                                            This argument is extended and explored in three applied examples of
                                                                              a prospective nature in the forms of actions, practice and products that
From these perspectives we could position design as a prospective             demonstrate probabilistic future knowledge aimed at underpinning a
thinking activity in the context of abductive reasoning (making decisions     proposed new framework.
without having all the information). In this area research by Dorst (2011)
or more recently Cramer-Petersen et al. (2018) have concluded that            Method - Examples and Prospective Actions
design combines deductive and abductive reasoning, however in both            Recently, due to emerging technologies transforming the future of our
cases abductive reasoning plays a fundamental role as the initiator of        cities, the Swedish government decided to investigate future housing
design activity. Without abductive reasoning there cannot be deductive        typologies. They selected a plot of land and invited a range of architects
as there would not be anything to reason from. Furthermore, as the            to present proposals for addressing the rising concerns around
digital paradigm with its exponential development and network                 sustainability and mobility. Some of these proposals were completed by
uncertainty will become more prevalent for design and research,               2018 (Mallet, 2018). The experiment was finished however we do not
researchers will need to focus more on the preventive and prospective         know whether these new typologies are adequate or not as we need to
aspects of design (preparedness, readiness and appropriateness). In
114                                                                                                                                                                  115
wait another 10 years to find out. As proposed by Aristotle, productive       problem solving, problem shaping, synthesis, preparedness, readiness
knowledge is defined by an act of exchange.                                   and appropriateness can provide a suitable framework to access these
                                                                              future spaces for knowledge.
Prospective Practices
In fashion, once a collection is presented, designers start to prepare        The same aspects could be drawn from the previous example in
their next collection. In this context, first they research potentialities;   government lead prospective transformation to investigate future
colours, fabrics, new materials, culture, etc. From these referential         typologies in cities. Neither scientist nor sociologists can grasp
points, they must generate ideas (vision), then design ideas are created      potential developments as they are limited by the present, either by
(technical aspects of making), and finally these ideas are presented to       measurement or observation. Yet the government must take action.
the public (show). The designers must develop this process without fully
knowing how the world will be. They start a collection in September           Finally, design practises may be understood as practises aiming for
which will be presented in February, yet will be bought by consumers          personal fulfilment or personal development. However, the authors
in the following September. At the time of the presentation when              address the applied nature of these disciplines aiming to go beyond
‘the experiment’ is finished they will know if the designs have been          personal transformation to deliver practical interventions to transform
technically well constructed, but will not know whether or not they will      society. This implies exchange beyond oneself involving social,
be successfully adopted in the marketplace. They need to wait some            economic and environmental activities. This exchange is always a
months to know whether they were the right designs or not. And they           posteriori and forever bounded to its environment. When you finish
will be able to assess them by the level of exchange generated.               a fashion collection, or an iPhone, or a house, or a song, or a theatre
                                                                              play, or a movie, or a book, or an app, you do not know whether it
Prospective Products                                                          will transform society or not. It will be known a posteriori and will be
In term of technology, another case can be illustrated by the iPhone.         valued based on whether there is exchange or not. Therefore, design is
When the design is finished we know if the camera works, whether              a prospective activity and knowledge in design is probabilistic in nature.
it creates photos with the right amount of pixels, whether the GPS
is accurate or whether or not it is ergonomic. However, we do not             These examples present a totally different knowledge, which is radically
know whether the iPhone will change future social and economical              different from the humanities and sciences observed by CP Snow. As
factors in 2 years time. The iPhone X is better in many ways than any         described in the examples presented in this section we may know
predecessors as it has a better camera, better screen, better sensors         ‘technical’ aspects; for instance structural or material qualities, or
and better software Etc. However, it is not being adopted at the same         whether they comply with a set of regulations, however we do not know
rate as previous versions were. A posteriori social, economical and           whether these are the right typologies for future living or the social
environmental factors affect the exchange mechanism. As proposed by           impact they may inflect in some years time. In sociology or science once
Aristotle, productive knowledge is defined by an act of exchange.             the experiment is finished we know the answer via measurement or
                                                                              observation. Design is prospective and this implies a probabilistic nature
Critical analysis                                                             to the knowledge generated as we are dealing with new propositions
The iPhone is a paradigmatic case to understand how we are grasping           that evolve in time.
the a posteriori impact of design as time evolves. In the first 2 years we
discovered that it had transformed the mobile industry. After 5 years         Discussion - Design as a method in research
we discovered that it had transformed the manufacturing system. Over          Design research practice emerged as a professionalised activity in the
10 years, we are discovering that it has transformed society. Scientific      1960’s, where domain thinking was largely dominated by the humanities
extrapolations could never have predicted the social implications             and the sciences. This ‘late arrival’ forced designers to adapt design
of having a tracking device in your pocket capable of monitoring              practice through methods from other domains. A good example of
everything you do and everywhere you go and use this information              this is Bruce Archer’s doctorate which attempted to explain design as a
to manipulate society, trends, markets and beliefs. Neither science nor       special branch of science (but usefully it failed in doing so)(Boyd Davis,
sociology could approach this a posteriori reality as they are limited        2016). Other examples are critical design, participatory design and
by what we do and have done and how we have achieved it. In other             social design which could be argued as conducting aspects of social
word an ontology of the past. As Glanville suggested, we are limited          science through design. Even environmental design or engineering
by knowledge of the past (Glanville, 2005). However, the intrinsic            design could be thought of as doing science though design. In these
prospective approach of design, based on planning, solution-based             cases design is dissolved into a methodological process based activity.
                                                                              If we position design as a data gathering method then we are tying
                                                                              design to the present. These aspects imply the dissolution of design

116                                                                                                                                                        117
as a discipline into views of the present and prevents it from being            among experts. To participate and collaborate with them as equals. In
recognised as an independent domain. Furthermore it questions the               this approach the gathering of an event returns to sociological practices
core ontology of design’s knowledge base for transforming that which            and the designer is embraced as a prospective expert whose main duty
has yet to arrive.                                                              is to develop and envisage the potential transformations between a
                                                                                knowledge-based technology and future society. This framework does
In this context, design becomes secondary and is subjected to other             not aim to prevent designers from becoming facilitators or doing
disciplines’ rules and mindsets. In this scenario thinking is analytical,       sociology through design, rather it aims to provide a new possibility
reasoning is deduced and knowledge must be factual by means of                  for designers to act as experts and embrace the intrinsic perspective of
observation or measurement. In this context abduction is denied. The            their true ontological expertise.
traditional paradigm positions design as a method within research
which creates tensions that arise between the prospective nature of             Probabilistic knowledge
design and the factual requirements of working in the present. There            However, this future-led proposition presents a problematic situation
is an ontological problem between the nature of design as future-led            for the ontology of knowledge, by which the limit is the present and the
and prospective, and the nature of research which is present-based              researcher is the witness, either through measurement or observation.
and factual. We argue that the core nature of design is probabilistic           In this area, if we analyse what happens in economics research we may
research, not empirically driven research. We trade some degrees of             find a suitable framework to solve this conundrum.
accuracy to access areas yet-to-be or not-fully-formed, therefore our
output is probabilistic and research is always preliminary in its nature.       Economic forecasting is the process of making predictions about the
Moreover, in exchange we provide guiding knowledge for prospective              economy with many institutions such as the International Monetary
technological developments; ‘knowledge for’ instead of ‘knowledge               Fund, World Bank, the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and
of’. We are concerned with how things ‘ought to be’ (Simon, 1996.               Development, national governments, central banks, private sector
p.111-167) instead of how things are.                                           entities, including think-tanks, banks, consultants and companies use
                                                                                economic forecasting. Economist use statistical analysis of historical
Design as a discipline of the future                                            data to determine the forecast. Formal forecasts are produced once
From this perspective we would position design as a future-led                  a year, however, quarterly updates or corrections are implemented to
prospective thinking activity in the context of abductive reasoning.            fine-tune the projection. The fundamental function of the economist
In this scenario, as the designer is neither a scientist nor a sociologist      is to anticipate future risks (i.e., events or conditions that can cause
(Cross, 1982, p. 221), design cannot be experimental as understood in           the result to vary from their initial estimates). These forecast are
scientific terms nor observational as understood in sociological terms,         continuously updated as the conditions of the environment evolve.
but transformational, as Aristotle suggested. (Hall, 20111).                    These evolutions determine whether the adjustments will get tighter
                                                                                or looser, how interest rates vary affecting a wide range of factors from
Consequently, its output is based on potentialities not certainties. In         loan repayments to employment levels.
the same way that anthropology is not about facts, but approximations
which are updated as new information emerges. In this context, as               At this point a fundamental question arises; is this knowledge? Of
the life of the intervention is placed into the future, time to assess the      course it is knowledge, it is probabilistic knowledge of the future. Based
impact of the design is extended during its lifetime. Validation is always      on theses economic forecast international institutions and governments
a posteriori and the proposed output becomes the main element to be             implement all manner of adjustments impacting the lives of millions.
assessed. The validity of the output generated, whether in a commercial         From this perspective economics research enables design to access
or research context will be judged by the transformational impact               the future by legitimising probabilistic knowledge as a valid type of
generated, which is defined by the level of exchange. The function of           knowledge. This element provides a bridge to reconcile the probabilistic
design is to transform and if the output does not achieve this, it has          nature of design with established frameworks of knowledge so far
failed.                                                                         understood as factual.

This perspective also repositions the role of the designer from a facilitator   The value of probabilistic design knowledge
into an expert in prospecting what could or should be done in the future.       In 1969 Peter Drucker popularised the ‘knowledge economy’ in his
It challenges current ideas in the field positioning the designer as an         book The age of discontinuity. (Drucker, 1969). Some decades later,
event gatherer, whose main function is to facilitate exchange among             the ‘Cox review’ established the need for an hybrid model entangling
experts. By repositioning the designer as an expert of the future, the          academia, the public and the private sectors (Cox, 2005). One year later,
role of the designer is to sit in the same room with an equal status            the World Bank presented its Knowledge Economy report and KAM

118                                                                                                                                                          119
methodology which asserts that sustained investments in education,            several universities in the sciences such as Stanford, University of
innovation, information, communication technologies and a conducive           Maryland, or Ball State University have been integrating design thinking
economic and institutional environment will lead to increases in the use      courses into their curriculums for some time (Morris, 2015). According
and creation of knowledge in economic production, and consequently            to Dorst ‘Design Thinking’ is identified “as an exciting new paradigm
result in sustained economic growth (Chen, D. H.C.; Dahlman, C. J.            for dealing with problems in many professions—most notably IT (e.g.,
2006). Following this report the Sainsbury review positioned science          Brooks 2010) and Business (e.g., Martin 2010)” (Dorst, 2011, p.131). If
as the main paradigm in developing the hybrid model. (Sainsbury,              we look at the term in Google trends, we can observe an exponential
2007). From this perspective a four years translational quarterly pilot       increase of the term ‘design thinking’.
project started in Liverpool. It was a project aimed at experimenting                                                                                      Figure 2. De-
with the hybrid system proposed by Cox. Following this experiment,                                                                                         sign thinking
in 2012 a report enhancing the advantages of the pilot was published                                                                                       evolution.
(Knowledge, 2018). Finally, in 2014 two £1 billion pound projects                                                                                          From Google
were announced; Imperial west and UCL East they aimed to scale the                                                                                         trends.
Liverpool pilot project.

In this context, what is changing is the productive model, from the
production of goods to the production of knowledge. The main
element to account for in this paradigm is the translational potentialities
of it, in other words, how to transform basic research into social and
economical opportunities. Nowadays, the value of research is not in
the discovery but in the value and impact it returns to society. In this
context sociologists and scientist are struggling when presenting the
future translational potentialities of their research and many institutions
are moving from fundamental to applied research to fulfil this shift.

For instance in sociology, building from the work of Pain, Gregson
and Olsen (Pain et al. 2011; Pain, 2014; Gregson et al. 2012; Olssen,
2015) the LSE’s Impact Blog explains that “Anxiety around the impact
agenda arises from the increasing instrumentalisation of knowledge,
the corporatisation of UK higher education, and the relationship
between assessment metrics and neoliberalism” As well as “fears that
impact will prioritise certain kinds of knowledge” or “there are also
concerns it rewards particular types of researcher” (Marchen, 2018).
In a demonstration of the transformational nature of research output
and impact, the LSE blog’s author argue that instead of building from
Pain et al.’s emphasis on the “political imperative to restate the kind of    However as Dorst point out its adoption is much more complex that
academy in which we want to work” (Marchen, 2018). Researchers need           current simplifications. This reality positions design and designers
to apply participatory action research to address the evolving nature         centre-stage as key partners in knowledge production and translation
of research (Marchen, 2018). Clearly the translational imperative of the      with an expertise as catalysts for prospective transformations.
knowledge based economy is starting to affect practices in sociology.
In this context cross-disciplinary collaborations among sociologists          Social
and designers may enhance the transformational potentialities of              As we are completing the transition from the industrial to the digital
sociological enquiry.                                                         economy the acceleration of innovation is transforming reality and
                                                                              affecting the development of society. In this context recent strategies
However, it seems that instead of fostering collaboration, which imply        in the social sphere call for anticipatory strategies, for instance Guston
understanding the expertise of designers and treating them as equals,         (2014) introduced the idea of anticipatory governance defining it as
others disciplines are either rejecting the new reality in the research       “a broad-based capacity extended through society that can act on a
ecosystem or adopting design methodologies as part of their toolkit           variety of inputs to manage emerging knowledge-based technologies
rather than inserting designers in the research process. For instance,        while such management is still possible” (Guston, 2014). In this

120                                                                                                                                                                 121
context, design, due to its intrinsic prospective characteristics based      theoretical knowledge can never be utilitarian builds on the ancient
on preparedness, readiness and appropriateness, seems the most               sense of theoria as observation rather than participation. In contrast,
appropriate partner to deal with the exponential nature of technological     the practical is applied and question based; it has a beginning and an
development from a prospective and preventive perspective. In this           end. Finally the prospective is based on a continuous interaction with
context applied ethics emerge as a fundamental implementation of             the environment. It is transformational and a commitment to practice
prospective design.                                                          (Atwill, 1998). Therefore prospective knowledge is defined as a capacity
                                                                             to make involving prospective reasoning to ‘go beyond’ what exists and
However, this acknowledgement has been missing in the area of                propose what can be ‘otherwise’.
social governance, where traditionally three main methods have been
implemented to deal with ethics in technology; technology assessments,       These assertions and arguments question the reality of the
ethical quandaries and public engagement. Sheila Jasanoff, professor         methodological nature of design and confront the practice-based
of ethics and invention at Harvard University provides a critical review     timeframe with a beginning and an end model imposed from the
of these procedures, and based on an extraordinary amount of                 sciences and humanities. The nature of time-based industrial processes
supporting evidence, she states that these processes while interesting       of knowledge production and traditional research approaches
are not sufficient to deal with the exponential nature of technological      are affecting the very same nature of these transformations and
advancement. Her book is a testament of the limitations of sociological      potentialities.
methods to address prospective technological development. As a
conclusion Jasanoff illustrate “how the power to set the rules of the game   Conclusions
for governing technology rests with capital and industry, and not with       We have argued to reposition the origin of design research and place
the political representatives of the working, consuming, and too often       it with an Aristotelian rationale of productive knowledge. This implies
suffering masses”. (Jasanoff, 2016. p. 266). The future of governance        that design research has no end in itself as it is always implicated and
is determined by design and only prospective activities may access           will remain in exchange. In this scenario design research has no external
those spaces from a proactive perspective. Sociological strategies are       arbiters and no final judge in the present. In this context neither the user
reactive in nature, as they limited by the present. Jasanoff’s account       nor the producer is capable of determining prospective knowledge as
presents an empirical need to enable a research space to address the         it is defined by an act of exchange. This exchange always redefines
rising concerns of technological development from a social perspective.      the subjects involved by effecting a shift in power and status through
And design prospective ontological nature fulfils this requirement.          its transformational nature. It cannot transcend time like mathematics
                                                                             and depends on time, contexts and circumstances. Therefore assuming
Finally, in a report presented by the Institute for the Future on            past, present and future timeframes and the impact of the environment
‘anticipatory governance’ (Future, 2009) the authors aim for processes       changing future social and economical factors. It is instrumental and
that involve the simulation of possible futures to address anticipation      situated, and its value is social, economic and environmental.
as a strategy for good government. In this context the prospective and
probabilistic nature of design may contribute significantly to the future    Design research is concerned with competing standards of value rather
development of society supporting anticipatory governance through            than securing boundaries of knowledge and its practice is based on
abductive-prospective thinking.                                              the capacity to make new futures involving abductive reasoning. It is
                                                                             concerned with something coming into being indicating that things
In this processes we aim to change the directionality of the action;         can be otherwise and beyond themselves as currently configured.
instead of waiting for the anticipation to happen, design allow us to be     It is concerned with indeterminate and possible within alternative
proactive and move for more imminent future transformations. The role        possibilities. From passive intellect (contemplation becoming its object)
of the prospective research-focused designer is to enhance knowledge-        to active intellect (object being defined) to prospective intellect (object
based technological potentialities and reduce future risks.                  being transformational a posteriori through exchange).

From time-based research to prospective interaction research                 In the prospective framework we have proposed design research can
How do we approach prospective design practice in the knowledge              access the future, however current models of research are limited by the
landscape? If we go back to the categorisation of knowledge presented        present either by observation or measurement. In order to address this
by Aristotle we can observe that he established three main categories;       fundamental aspect we present the concept of probabilistic knowledge
the theoretical, the practical and the productive. Theoretical knowledge     by building from new approaches in design and economics. Probabilistic
encompasses abstract subjects. It is concerned with things that are          knowledge in the context of design could be defined as the potential
universal and necessary. Yet that cannot be applied. The idea that           impact of transformational initiatives.

122                                                                                                                                                         123
                                                                             References
The value of design research as presented here is economic and social
therefore aiming for mixed methodologies to implement strategies             Archer, L. B., (1978) Time for a Revolution in Art and Design Education. RCA Papers No.
building informed interventions to support planning, solution-based          6. Royal College of Art, London.
problem solving, problem shaping, synthesis, preparedness and                Aristotle., (2000). Book VI. In R. Crisp (Ed.), Aristotle: Nicomachean Ethics (Cambridge
appropriateness in the built environment. These aspects are fundamental      Texts in the History of Philosophy, pp. 103-118). Cambridge: Cambridge University
                                                                             Press. doi:10.1017/CBO9780511802058.010
for an adequate development of society in an ever evolving world
based on exponential technological developments. So far inaccessible         Aristotle., (1998). Metaphysics. Translated by Lawson-Tancred, Hugh. Penguin. 1998.
                                                                             ISBN 0140446192.
due to the present limit framework of sociology or science that can
only analyse what already exist. We propose making a contribution to         Aristotle., (1984 ). Rhetoric. W. Rhys Roberts (tr.). in The Complete Works of Aristotle.
                                                                             Vol. II. Jonathon Barnes (ed.). Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
contextualising Glanville’s concept of knowledge for transforming the
future as a probabilistic knowledge ontology.                                Atwill, J., (1998). Rhetoric reclaimed: Aristotle and the liberal arts tradition. Ithaca, NY:
                                                                             Cornell University Press.

This approach reposition the role of the designer from a facilitator to      Ball, T., (1977). Plato and Aristotle: The Unity versus the Autonomy of Theory and
                                                                             Practice. From: Political Theory and Praxis: New Perspectives. pp. 55-70. Minneapolis:
an expert in prospective future-led translational and transformational       University of Minnesota Press.
technological      developments       to   enhance     knowledge-based
                                                                             Boyd Davis, S., Gristwood, S., (2016). The Structure of Design Processes: Ideal and
technological potentialities and reduce future risks. In the process         Reality in Bruce Archer’s 1968 Doctoral Thesis, Design Research Society, Brighton, June
reposition multidisciplinary research collaborations from a subject          27-30th 2016
facilitating discussion between experts to being one of the experts in the   Chen, Derek H.C.; Dahlman, Carl J., (2006). The knowledge economy, the KAM
panel with the same status and role. This prospective nature excludes        methodology and World Bank operations (English). Washington, DC: World Bank.
the designer from being a scientist or a sociologist and prevents design     http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/695211468153873436/The-knowledge-
from being experimental or observational (in the scientific meaning of       economy-the-KAM-methodology-and-World-Bank-operations
the term), as the projected potentiality is placed in a society yet-to-      Cox, G., (2005). Cox review of Creativity in Business: building on the UK’s strengths.
be or not-fully-formed. Therefore it cannot be precisely measured or         https://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/20120704143146/http://www.hm-treasury.
                                                                             gov.uk/d/Cox_review-foreword-definition-terms-exec-summary.pdf
described as it does not fully exist.
                                                                             Cramer-Petersen, C. L., Christensen, B. T., & Ahmed-Kristensen, S., (2019). Empirically
                                                                             Analysing Design Reasoning Patterns: Abductive-deductive Reasoning Patterns
                                                                             Dominate Design Idea Generation. Design Studies, 60, 39-70. DOI: 10.1016/j.
                                                                             destud.2018.10.001
                                                                             Cross, N., (1982). Designerly ways of knowing, Design Studies Vol. 3, No. 4 October
                                                                             1982, pp. 221-227.
                                                                             Dorst, K., (2011) The Core of “Design Thinking” and Its Application. Design Studies, 32,
                                                                             521-532. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.destud.2011.07.006
                                                                             Future, I., (2009). Anticipatory governance. From institute of the future. Retrieved: 12
                                                                             April 2019. http://www.iftf.org/uploads/media/SR-1272_anticip_govern-1.pdf
                                                                             Galdon, F., Hall, A. (2019). Prospective design: A future-led mixed-methodology to
                                                                             mitigate unintended consequences. Proceedings of the International Association of
                                                                             Societies of Design Research Conference IASDR2019, The University of Manchester,
                                                                             UK.
                                                                             Glanville, R., 2005, The Unthinkable Doctorate: Brussels, Design Prepositions.
                                                                             Cybernetics Research. American Society of Cybernetics, UK and Australia
                                                                             Gregson, N., Watkins, H., Broughton, L., Mackenzie, J., & Shepherd, J. (2011). Building
                                                                             Bridges Through Performance and Decision-making: Schools, Research and Public
                                                                             Engagement. Antipode, 44(2), 343–364. doi:10.1111/j.1467-8330.2010.00839.x
                                                                             Guston, D. H., (2014). Understanding ‘anticipatory governance.’ Social Studies of
                                                                             Science, 44(2), 218–242.. https://doi.org/10.1177/0306312713508669.
                                                                             Hall, A. (2011). Experimental design: Design experimentation. Design Issues, 27(Number
                                                                             2, Spring 2011), 17-26pp.
                                                                             Jasanoff, S., (2016). The Ethics of Invention: Technology and the Human Future. New
                                                                             York: W.W. Norton & Company
                                                                             Liverpool Knowledge quarter, (2018). Bringing the vision to life. Retrieved: 12 March

124                                                                                                                                                                          125
2019. https://www.kqliverpool.co.uk/pdf/kql_vision.pdf
Levin, P H., (1966). ‘Decision making in urban design’ Building Research Station Note
EN51/66 Building Research Station, Garston, Herts, UK.
Mallet, L., (2018). Creating quality living:the new Swedish town offering innovative
solutions to London’s housing crisis. Evening standard. https://www.homesandproperty.
co.uk/property-news/the-new-swedish-town-offering-innovative-solutions-to-londons-
housing-crisis-a116751.html
Marchen, R., (2018). Impact from critical research: what might it look like and what
support is required?. LSE Impact Blog. September 4th, 2018. Acceded; 14 March 2019.
18:06. https://blogs.lse.ac.uk/impactofsocialsciences/2018/09/04/impact-from-critical-
research-what-might-it-look-like-and-what-support-is-required/
Morris, H. and Warman. G. (2015). Using Design Thinking in Higher Education.
Published: Monday, January 12, 2015. Accessed; March, 14, 2019. https://er.educause.
edu/articles/2015/1/using-design-thinking-in-higher-education
Olssen, M., (2015). Neoliberal competition in higher education today: research,
accountability and impact. British Journal of Sociology of Education, 37(1), 129–148. do
i:10.1080/01425692.2015.1100530
Pain, R., Kesby, M., & Askins, K. (2010). Geographies of impact: power, participation and
potential. Area, 43(2), 183–188. doi:10.1111/j.1475-4762.2010.00978.x
Pain, Rachel. 1. “Impact: Striking a Blow or Walking Together?”. ACME: An International
Journal for Critical Geographies 13 (1), 19-23. https://www.acme-journal.org/index.
php/acme/article/view/986.
Sainsbury, L. (2007). The Sainsbury review. The Race to the Top; A Review of
Government’s Science and Innovation Policies. Retrieved: 12 February 2019. http://
www.rsc.org/images/sainsbury_review051007_tcm18-103118.pdf
Simon, H. (1996). The Sciences of the Artificial. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. ISBN 0-262-
69191-4
Snow, C. P. (1959). The Two Cultures and Scientific Revolution, New York: Cambridge
University Press, 2013.




126                                                                                         127
               The future
             of seafaring:
             Designing an
           on-board user-
      Interface to predict
          engine faults on
           marine vessels
                   Simone Gumtau
128                           129
Abstract                                                                       2005; Winton, 1989; Brown, 2016). They have equally suffered in times
This paper describes a collaboration between a communication designer          of globalised changes in labour markets and manufacturing capacities in
and data scientists and engineers at the University of Portsmouth, to          the maritime transport industry (Lee, 2010). In spite of local protestation
work with a consortium of companies in the marine industry around the          (BBC News, 2013) around the outsourcing and relocating the majority of
Solent in South East England. The change affected here was economic            the shipbuilding works (Rankin, 2013; Milmo, 2013), the lure of cheaper
and environmental: to add value to marine engineering services in              labour overseas and the advantages of centralising resources, as well as
order to retain market competitiveness, to comply with international           the decline of naval contracts as government investment has dwindled
standards to reduce fuel consumption and emission through innovation,          has meant that companies have to look for alternative and increasingly
and also to provide a better user experience through design.                   creative solutions to survive. The UK government has recognised
                                                                               and partially addressed this issue and through their funding body
In particular, the design research for a user interface on board the ship      ‘Innovate UK’ seeks to invest in skills training and technology research
to assist non-experts in monitoring engineering data will be described.        & development – their solution is to maintain market competitiveness
The design visualises sensor data taken from various engine components         through the creation of innovation, knowledge and service. In 2011,
by utilising body schema like movement and rotation. Theoretically, this       Innovate UK released a UK Marine Roadmap for Growth (Department
design approach draws on phenomenology, embodied cognition and                 for Business, Innovation & Skills, 2011), as part of their funding call
metaphor.                                                                      ‘Vessel Efficiency II – Better Systems at Sea’ (Vessel Efficiency, n.d.),
                                                                               which pictured greater cooperation across the marine industries and
This project involves a design lecturer working with data scientists in        maritime services sector. Key opportunities for business growth were
order to make the data more user-friendly. The context is data taken           predicted to exist for business and research that work together to
from the marine and dairy industry, which is ultimately used to detect         develop innovative solutions in advanced materials, and, relevant to
and predict faulty engine parts. The design aspect here is to provide a        this project, green ship technologies, positioning and communication
user-friendly interface, but involves much more than that. To make sense       and vessel design and engineering.
of the data and make it accessible to a wider audience, the designer
has to work closely with the data analyst to decide upon relevant              Rising fuel costs, shipping overcapacity and the International Maritime
parameters in the raw data, which then also determines the hierarchy           Organization (IMO) requirement for all ships to have a SEEMP (Ship
of information on screen – i.e. questions of which information the user        Energy Efficiency Management Plan) meant that there is a concrete
needs immediately, and which can be hidden in a different layer, can           incentive to develop technologies that support the monitoring
only be answered if the whole of the data collection and processing            and management of ship engines to their optimum performance,
system is understood. In practice, the collaboration between the               reflected in the government funding call ‘Vessel Efficiency I & II’. The
designer and the data scientists was crucial in determining an approach        collaborative project IConIC (Intelligent Condition Monitoring with
to visualise the data set and to develop the story that the data tells.        Integrated Communications) was timely for addressing these global
The challenge for the data visualisation was to move beyond simple             and societal challenges, and proposed to utilize state of the art
traffic light systems – as the data was processed through intelligent          technologies involving intelligent data solutions, big data and satellite
machine analysis, the key approach to the data science here is that a          communications as well as the design of a user-centred interface.
‘healthiness’ score is generated, which contains more complexity than          IConIC project: improving maintenance and communication systems
a threshold-based system, which could be dealt with through ‘on’ or            through intelligent data use
‘off’ states.
                                                                               The IConIc project consortium received £1.4million by Innovate
The design approach seeks to enhance understanding of the data,                UK (the former Technology Strategy Board government investment
by letting users / the audience experience it in an embodied and also          arm for tech research & development) to develop and implement
tactile way. Sample data, which represents healthy and faulty engine           new technologies using data to improve marine vessel efficiency
performance, has been visualized in a prototype user interface and             and safety. The performance of marine engines used for propulsion
translated into a vibrating display. These different ‘data materializations’   and power generation has a significant impact on efficient vessel
set out to problematize the human experience within the scientific             operations. Inefficient or failed engines, when undetected, can leave
process of data processing and representation.                                 a vessel stranded at sea resulting huge costs in time and money, and
                                                                               with increased risk to crew and passengers. Famously, one of Carnival
Changes in the Shipbuilding Industry in South East of England                  Splendor’s cruise ships was unable to propel itself forward for days
The Solent area with its busy commercial and naval ports Southampton           after a mechanical error and resulting fire in the engine room, leading
and Portsmouth has a rich history in terms of maritime industries (Coad,       to very uncomfortable conditions for the people on board and at a
                                                                               huge cost for Carnival Splendor in 2010 (Medina, 2010). If, however
130                                                                                                                                                          131
the crew was able to monitor and predict engine faults, planned repairs         The team enlisted the expertise of a designer (author of this paper)
and maintenance could then take place in a timely fashion at a suitable         to work on visualising the data into an easily perceivable form, and to
location with suitably trained engineers, rather than out at sea. Global        allow non-experts make sense of the information.
societal benefits in the reduction of fuel consumption and emissions
were a direct aim of this research – the target for IConIC was a 3-5%           Making sense of and preparing the sample data
reduction in fuel consumption and emissions coupled with a 25%                  The first step in the design process was then to get familiar with the
increase in engine availability. Regional benefits were envisaged to be         kind of data that the sensors were generating, and how we might
achieved by working towards ensuring economic competitiveness of                make sense of it in terms of what needs to be communicated. To this
local employers and growing and maintaining skilled jobs in a future            end, communication and collaboration with the data scientists on the
less reliant on defence contracts (in this case mostly implementing,            project, Dr. Edward Smart and his PhD researcher at the time, Dr. Faith
monitoring and maintaining systems and services on civilian marine              Thompson was essential. They provided me with a data sample taken
vessels like ferries and cruise ships).                                         on 3 different dates, that I could use to pore over and experiment with.
                                                                                Looking at the Excel tables, it was clear that some editing, filtering and
The IConIC consortium formed of The Centre for Intelligent Data                 organising was going to be needed if any sense was to be made here.
Solutions / Institute for Industrial Research based in the faculty of           While somebody dealing with this data every day in numerical form, and
Creative and Cultural Industries at the University of Portsmouth, the           even in classic mathematical diagram form (such as a box and whisker
University of Southampton, the Digital Catapult for Satellite Applications      graph) may have been able to glean some information from these rows
and a consortium of Solent based shipping companies worked together             of data, anybody less familiar with it and less skilled in decoding these
to develop an advanced automated condition monitoring system for                visualisations would have been lost.
diesel and electric engines, to predict and prevent catastrophic faults in
a timely manner. The engines in question on these marine vessels are                                                                                         Figure 1. Box
huge and opaque and tend to reside in dark, noisy and inaccessible                                                                                           and Whisker
spaces (for an indication of the kind of engines that are being referred                                                                                     Plot of
                                                                                                                                                             Sample Data
to here, this video of an engine starting up at the Diesel House Museum                                                                                      1-24
(2015) in Copenhagen serves as an illustration https://www.youtube.
com/watch?v=g3DsWLn0r24). The engineering solution therefore
was to deploy sensors on the main engine parts, to monitor the rate
(frequency/intensity) of vibration and torque in real time – for the
purposes of this paper and the prototype data visualisation, we focused
on vibration data. An engine part showing large and frequent anomalies
in their vibration pattern would be diagnosed as likely being faulty. The
innovation in this system is not to rely simply on ‘thresholds’ in the data,
but to be based on the algorithmic analysis of the data (autonomous
intelligence), which allows each component to be diagnosed with a
‘healthiness score’, which needs a more complex representation than
simply stating ‘on’ or ‘off’.

Design challenge: Visualizing ‘Healthiness’ of Sensor Data
The design problem now was to visualise this data in a way that it
would be a) readable by low skilled crew, who would be able to monitor
performance just by a glance while performing other tasks on board b)
communicate anomalies and decay in the data that would go beyond a
simple traffic light system, as this form of colour coding is too limiting
for the complexity in the data and only indicates ‘healthy’ or ‘faulty’. So,
in a sense this interface would serve as a first point of call, an alert that
would prompt further investigation of the issue, and it therefore would
have to be as user-friendly as possible.




132                                                                                                                                                                    133
                                                                           Figure 2. Box    to thresholds, but about a more nuanced recognition of ‘healthiness’,         Figure 4.
                                                                           and Whisker      which is inherently more complex.                                             Sample Data
                                                                           Plot of Sample                                                                                 in Excel x
                                                                           Data 3-3




                                                                                                                                                                          Figure 5.
                                                                                                                                                                          Sample Data
                                                                                                                                                                          in Excel x.1
                                                                           Figure 3. Box
                                                                           and Whisker
                                                                           Graph Sample
                                                                           Data 3-23




                                                                                                                                                                          Figure 6.
                                                                                                                                                                          Sample Data
                                                                                                                                                                          in Excel x.2




Sensor data was read at a frequency of ca every 2.7 seconds, so a
timespan of 1 hour would already generate approximately 25 data rows
in Excel, and there are 13 columns representing the different engine
components. To get a sense of the data, I generated some simple                             So, for example, it may seem logical to look for the largest ‘outliers’ and
visualisations within Excel, and that allowed me to see enough patterns                     highest ‘spikes’ in the data, because this would seem to indicate that
in the data to be able to talk about this in more depth with the data                       there is a problem – due to the scale / severity of the anomaly. However,
scientists. When I showed these figures (4-6) to my collaborators, they                     familiarity with the nature of the sensor data provides a more in-depth
were able to explain the key consideration in terms of the intelligent                      view – singular spikes and extreme outliers are not as interesting to this
data solution: that this was not simply about recognising and responding                    particular purpose of engine fault diagnosis, because they may simply
134                                                                                                                                                                                135
be a freak, or singular, occurrence. What is much more of interest here                                                                                                    Figure 9. Ex-
are incidents where the data graph seems to be changing its shape                                                                                                          cel graph of 3
over time, as that is more likely to reflect an engine part becoming                                                                                                       engine parts:
                                                                                                                                                                           1 part spikes
‘unhealthy’. Another key thing to look out for was if 2 graphs start to
                                                                                                                                                                           below very
change their shape, within the same timeframe, especially if they are                                                                                                      low threshold
representing connecting engine components – as this can indicate that                                                                                                      - healthy
the faulty engine part is starting to transmit its wayward force to another
engine part.

The next step in the data handling was then to reduce the data further
in order to get to more depth in my sensemaking – so I focused on
3 engine parts (1 showing no variation, and 2 showing some amount
of variation, i.e. ‘unhealthiness’) and reduced the sample data to 24
rows (which roughly translates to one hour of sampling). This step in
the design process enabled a much better communication between
data scientist and designer, and together we were able to agree on the                          The figures 7t o 9 illustrate 2 states that we were interested in, and
parameters that were going to be used in the visualisation.                                     that were going to be visualized as distinct points of interest in the
                                                                                                data story: fig 7 shows 2 extreme spikes, which are not necessarily of
                                                                              Figure 7. Excel
                                                                                                interest as they are high, but short. They are however occurring in 2
                                                                              graph of 3
                                                                              engine parts:     engine parts, which may be relevant. Fig 8 shows at a later date, that
                                                                              short, intense    these 2 engine parts have indeed started to show anomalies in their
                                                                              spikes – prob-    performance over time. Although the spikes are not nearly as extreme
                                                                              ably healthy      as before, what is relevant here is the fact that the shape continuously
                                                                                                changes, and that there seems to be some correspondence in the
                                                                                                graphs of the different engine parts, which might reflect that they have
                                                                                                started to affect each other. Figure 9 shows a couple of spikes, however
                                                                                                they are fairly low in reach on both intensity and timespan, and only
                                                                                                affect one engine part – we can therefore probably safely assume that
                                                                                                this shows a ‘healthy’ engine.

                                                                                                                                                                           Figure 10.
                                                                                                                                                                           Sketch of
                                                                                                                                                                           Data graphs
                                                                                                                                                                           - all samples
                                                                              Figure 8.                                                                                    layered
                                                                              Excel graph
                                                                              of 3 engine
                                                                              parts: 2
                                                                              parts show-
                                                                              ing anom-
                                                                              alies over
                                                                              time – alert




136                                                                                                                                                                                  137
In the following, I set to work on writing a set of rules, akin to an                             Lakoff and Johnson (1980) describe in ‘Metaphors We live By’
algorithm, that would allow a systematic processing of this data into a                           how metaphors are more than just literary devices, but allude to
visualization. So, for example if the graph stays below a certain point,                          mental concepts that we share and understand and are essential to
data will be assumed to be ‘healthy’. If the data shows intense, but                              understanding the way we make sense of our experience. Lakoff and
short, spikes, then this might bring up a slightly different state and act                        Johnson write that “the essence of metaphor is understanding and
as an alert to keep watch. If the data shows spikes over a certain value,                         experiencing one kind of thing in terms of another” (Lakoff & Johnson,
over a certain time, then this will be reflected in a changes state visually,                     1980, p.5). Exploring metaphors can therefore unpack some of the ways
and if this includes another component then another visual element will                           we understand certain concepts. These metaphors are emergent in
be added. The next section will describe how the visual responses were                            everyday language and ‘we live by them’ to the degree that it is hard to
mapped to the data.                                                                               step outside of them. Lakoff & Johnson (1980) also describe how a lot
                                                                                                  of metaphors are based on our physical experience (e.g. ‘intangible’):
                                                                                                  our knowledge of what we know and what we don’t know about our
                                                                                Figure 11.        bodies in space and time.
                                                                                Rules generat-
                                                                                ed to handle
                                                                                the data into 4
                                                                                                  Mark Johnson further explores the relationship between the body
                                                                                data states       and the mind, and suggests that the formation of internal concepts
                                                                                                  is grounded in physical experiences. They are based on patterns of
                                                                                                  occurrences between our bodies and the environment. These patterns
                                                                                                  become coherent structures through which we make sense of our world
                                                                                                  and develop “publicly shared meaning structures” (Johnson, 1987,
                                                                                                  p. 13). He introduces the idea of embodied ‘image schema’, based
                                                                                                  on Kant’s definition of schemata as “non-propositional structures
                                                                                                  of imagination” (ibid, p.19). That is to say they “exist, rather, in a
                                                                                                  continuous, analogue fashion in our understanding” (ibid, p.23). They
                                                                                                  are also not strictly images in the sense of concrete pictures, and can,
                                                                                                  and often do, incorporate the haptic modality, in a cross-modal manner -
                                                                                                  often linked to spatial manipulation, orientation, and movement. Image
                                                                                                  schemata share some basic elements that have related structures, yet
                                                                                                  are flexible. They have gestalt characteristics: “coherent, meaningful,
                                                                                                  unified wholes within our experience and cognition” (ibid, p. 41).
                                                                                                  He suggests they form structures for organizing our experience and
                                                                                                  comprehension. Also, Johnson in his more recent work (2007) provides
                                                                                                  more detail and evidence towards the claim that some meaning is pre-
                                                                                                  linguistic and pre-reflective, unconscious and the base for metaphor
                                                                                                  processes. He defines several categories of sensorimotor schemas,
                                                                                                  and the most relevant here is the ‘spatial motion group’ of embodied
                                                                                                  metaphors, in particular the concept of containment or a container
Enactive Metaphors for Making Sense of Abstract Meaning                                           (understanding ‘in’ or ‘out’, and the concept of a path (understanding
The visual data visualization design concept draws on theoretical                                 something that goes ‘up’ or ‘down’. Gallagher (2005) also writes about
approaches to embodied perception and metaphor. Embodied                                          body schema as relevant to contemporary cognitive science research.
perception considers the body and actor-environment relationship as                               Reed’s work on the ontogenetic precedence of indicational, pre-
essential for communication and interaction (Gibson, 1966; Gibson                                 linguistic interaction between infants and caregivers makes a similar
1979; Nöe, 2004; Merleau-Ponty, 2002). Understanding embodied                                     point, from the perspective of ecological psychology (Reed, 1995).
metaphors as something fundamental to communication means there                                   Ramachandran (2003), drawing on the famous ‘kiki’ (spiky shape) and
are synesthetic phenomena we can draw on to enable interaction                                    ‘buba’ (soft, bulbous shape) example argues that the mapping across
that is more immediate, intuitive, pre-linguistic and multimodal. This                            different sensory modalities is the phylogenetic foundation for language
was intended to be a key characteristic of the data visualization in the                          itself. It is the metaphoric link between the visual form of the shape, and
design project described here.                                                                    the aural shape of the word that are important, not primarily the more
                                                                                                  abstract symbolic content. Jay Seitz further elaborated on the origins
                                                                                                  and exact processes of metaphor and provided extensive evidence
138                                                                                                                                                                             139
for the neurological, developmental, biological and evolutionary basis        of it much easier. If we look at an engine part going wrong, we could
of metaphor. He proposes metaphors to be so fundamental as to                 probably tell by the way it jars and moves off kilter. There is a level of
include preliterate, prelinguistic and extra-linguistic factors. Perceptual   experiential, embodied knowledge we can all employ to tell when there
metaphor (e.g. colour, shape, texture, size) is described mostly a            seems to be an error. This is how intuitive this data visualization design
case of ‘it looks like that’ – for example, even children will be able to     needed to be. I continued with the theme of cyclical rotation and off
identify a plate of spaghetti as a “bunch of worms”. Enactive metaphor        kilter motion to design a representation for each engine part made out
(movement, action and activity) could be classed as a case of ‘it moves       of a set of moving circles that could interlink, line up, and be off set
like that’ – where movement and motion information are correlated,            against each other. Visual research included exploration of geometric
for example in associating a spinning top with a dancing ballerina. The       form (Fabiano Coelho, 2009; Eva Schindlig, 2008), graphic ways of
other two types of metaphor are classed as cross-modal or synesthetic         expressing traces of motion (Pierro Zagami, 2010) and spirograph
(e.g. brightness and loudness) and physiognomic experiences (visual-          patterns (Max Frey, 2007).
affective and sensory-affective) and can be useful for design, but will
not be explored further here. Images schemas, embodied perception                                                                                          Figure 12.
and in particular enactive metaphors inform the design concept in                                                                                          Rules for
this project, and it is assumed that this will allow the user to generate                                                                                  handling the
meaning in their interaction with the data visualizations.                                                                                                 data mapped
                                                                                                                                                           into visual
                                                                                                                                                           form: 4 state
Applying Perception Theory to Develop Design Prototype                                                                                                     changes
The concept of enactive metaphor, actor-environment interaction and
image schemata has been applied to the data visualization design
concept here in a way to draw on our (or the engineer’s) embodied
experience of the world. For other work related to embodiment,
metaphor and data visualization, refer to Risch (2008) or Zhao & Vande
Moere (2008).

We (the project team) were told anecdotally that the ship engineers that
used to travel onboard would be able to diagnose the state of a vessel
engine by using all their senses and tacit knowledge. They would be
able to place a hand on these huge, opaque and inaccessible engines,
and roughly locate the sources of any anomalies through feeling the
vibration pattern, and they would use their highly attuned listening
skills to further identify the state of the engine. Now unfortunately
through the rationalization in the ever more competitive marketplace,
these highly trained and skilled workers are no longer in place. With
this project, we could neither bring them back nor seek to replace them       Figure 12 shows the 4 states of data that was derived from the sample,
– but what the technology and design innovation here could provide            the rules to process this data, and the corresponding visual response
is some measure of ‘tacitness’ and ‘intuitiveness’ that would benefit         mapping to communicate the state change. From State 1, which is
the less skilled person on board in order to help them make the right         healthy, and the circles do not move off centre, to State 2, where one
decision (which is to either alert the ship crew to a severe error in case    circle goes briefly slightly off centre, to State 3 where one circle goes
this becomes obvious, or to decide that no extra effort and investment        right off centre, and finally State 4, where 2 circles simultaneously go
is needed in case the engine shows healthy scores).                           extremely off centre. This was produced as a sequential animation,
                                                                              to demonstrate the visual effect of seeing the parts move and go off
I therefore decided to place intuitiveness and embodiment, as discussed       centre. The static image captures some of this intuitive perception,
above, at the heart of the design concept. In one way, what I was trying      but the motion in the animation really enhances it and makes it more
to do is to revert the abstract numbers back to their original analogue       immediate.
form of vibration as much as possible. The data in the Excel table
makes no sense to us, the human user, because these are numbers are           The rules that were developed are open to interpretation, if they are to
representing motion in a very abstract, alphanumerical way. If we could       be used for creative development – in this case, I had to decide in which
see the motion behind the numbers, we may be able to make sense               way to map the data, via the ‘algorithm’, to a designed visual response.
                                                                              A demo prototype focusing on 3 engine parts from the sample data:
140                                                                                                                                                                 141
End Gear Box, Universal Joint and Main Gear box was developed to                              Figure 14
show how this could be implemented.                                                           Visualization
                                                                                              of State 2:
                                                                                              Short, intense
For state 1 (value stays below 120), data seems to be healthy, and the
                                                                                              spikes in the
3 circles representing the engine parts rotate at a steady pace (fig 13).                     data on 2
For state 2, which was identified as short intense spikes (value goes                         engine parts
over 1000 briefly), that might be worth investigating, but probably are
of no concern to the state of the engine, intense dark jagged circular
lines are added to the rotating circles (fig 14). For state 3 (value is
more than 120 for more than 2 points on the x axis), this was meant
to communicate that this may need monitoring, as the engine part is
starting to behave differently over some time - another component is
added to the circle, in this case a light blue shape that rotates around
the circular shape, starting to look slightly ‘off centre’ and ‘off kilter’
(fig 15). For state 4 (value is over 50 for 2 elements for more than 2
points on the x axis), this data shows that a part of the engine is going
wrong for some time, and has possibly started to influence another
component of the engine, so this will definitely have to raise an alarm
                                                                                              Figure 15 Vis-
– in this case, 2 red elements are added to the rotating circles (fig 16).                    ualization of
Reflecting on the implementation of the ‘rules’, there has been some                          State 3: Data
adjustment when it came to making sure that the visual mapping really                         is showing
does communicate intuitively and without the need for explanation in                          anomalies
this demo prototype. The prototype was placed in an exhibition at the                         over time
University of Portsmouth (Gumtau, 2015), but as the IConiC project was
not centred around the design of the GUI, but rather the intelligent
data and satellite communication system, there was not enough time
within the funded project to implement this on board. It is envisaged
that a second stage of this project would entail the installing of the GUI
on board of the company vessels that formed part of the consortium –
for example, a Solent ferry. This would then entail in situ user testing of
the intuitiveness and effectiveness of the interface.
                                                                              Figure 13
                                                                              Visualization
                                                                              of State 1:
                                                                              Healthy Data
                                                                                              Figure 16 Vis-
                                                                                              ualization of
                                                                                              State 4: Data
                                                                                              is showing
                                                                                              anomalies
                                                                                              over time,
                                                                                              on 2 engine
                                                                                              parts




142                                                                                                     143
Materializing the Data: Vibration to Vibration                                                                                                                            Figure 18.
For the purpose of the exhibition and experimenting with making the                                                                                                       Haptic
                                                                                                                                                                          interface
data even more intuitively perceptible, we decided to take the return
                                                                                                                                                                          CodeEye
to the original stimulus behind the abstract numbers even further and                                                                                                     representing
developed the haptic interface: “CodeEye”. Inspired by the tacit – and                                                                                                    data through
tactile knowledge that ship engineers use to allow them to diagnose                                                                                                       cyclical vibra-
the state of an engine, the sense of touch was going to be an obvious                                                                                                     tion patterns
choice to extend the immediacy and intuitiveness of the communication
for a non-expert. This kind of interface would also go some way to
address the difficulty of perception in the spaces that these engines are
situated: dark, noisy, uncomfortable and inaccessible places. CodeEye
was designed to allow the user to place their hand on a circular
surface, which provides the data as vibration patterns, picking up the
circular theme from the data visualization. The aesthetic of the physical
interface takes its cues from materials utilized in industrial shipping,
such as a black rubber surface, stretched across a circular wooden
frame, making the unit resemble a kind of analogue marine navigation
instrument. The rubber surface was embellished with a circular pattern
made from conductive paint, that could respond to the presence of
touch by communicating the sample data via a circular array of small
vibration motors underneath the surface. The design research for this
interface will not be described in depth here, but it serves to exemplify                    developing innovation in a consortium of marine services companies,
the experimentation around the materiality of the data, and the stated                       academic research and development departments and the end users
aim of transforming the abstract alphanumerical data back to its original                    in form of shipping companies using ferries, cruise ships etc. The
analogue qualities.                                                                          aspect of the intelligent data analysis was shown to be a complex data
                                                                                             visualization problem and therefore prompted some design research
                                                                                             experiments to develop an intuitive graphical user interface that could
Conclusions
                                                                                             be used by non-expert members of the shipping crew. As part of the
In the context of global changes in the maritime industries, and in
                                                                                             prototype development for an exhibition, a haptic interface was also
the South East of England in particular, the project IConIC has been
                                                                                             designed. Both interfaces seek to return the abstract data to the form
described. This was not a design-led project, but it was aimed at
                                                                                             of their analogue stimulus in order to make them easy to understand,
                                                                            Figure 17.       while complex enough in terms of the state of the meanings rendered.
                                                                            Sketch of        Drawing on perception theory like phenomenology, embodied
                                                                            the vibration    cognition and metaphor, body schema of rotation and motion were
                                                                            motor array in   applied into a system using circular elements to represent different
                                                                            CodeEye          states of healthiness in 3 engine parts: End Gear Box, Main Gear Box
                                                                                             and Universal Joint. Working with the sample data set, 4 different states
                                                                                             were devised that would be relevant to make sense of the data and
                                                                                             require different levels of responsiveness from the user. The vibrotactile
                                                                                             interface ‘CodeEye’ develops the theme of tacit knowledge and
                                                                                             intuitive perception by adding the haptic modality to perceive circular
                                                                                             data patterns. Concluding, it can be said that this project was useful
                                                                                             to explore new boundaries and ways to apply design thinking and
                                                                                             user-centredness in the context of engineering, which has traditionally
                                                                                             focused more on the utility of design. It has opened up channels of
                                                                                             communication between the data scientists and the data visualization
                                                                                             designer, which would be useful to explore further as this kind of
                                                                                             development of a shared language and process would benefit this
                                                                                             quickly developing discipline of data visualization. In a future project,
                                                                                             the implementation and evaluation of the design would have to be

144                                                                                                                                                                                  145
integrated into the project plan in order to further improve the value    References
of the research.
                                                                          BAE Shipyard Job Cuts Rally Staged in Portsmouth. BBC News, 9th November 2013
It would be interesting and rewarding to see this kind of design          (Retrieved online 27/3/2019 from)
                                                                          https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-hampshire-24863694
approach and collaboration applied in a wider context, paving the way
for user-friendly experiences with data and a human interface to big      Brown, P. (2016). Maritime Portsmouth. Stroud: The History Press
data processes. A designer will always seek to ask pertinent questions    Coad, J. (2005). The Portsmouth Block Mills: Bentham, Brunel and the Start of the Royal
and ways of making complex information graspable, and can therefore       Navy’s Industrial Revolution. Swindon: English Heritage
make valuable contributions to increasingly abstract data interactions.   Coelho, F. (2010) Geometric Experiments. In Klanten, R. (Ed) Data Flow v. 2: Visualising
                                                                          Information in Graphic Design. Gestalten Verlag
Not only engineering, but in general the communication of science,        Department for Business, Innovation and Skills (2011). A Strategy for Growth for the UK
                                                                          Marine Industries. Ref 11/1311
data and research, which is seeking to have an impact, can benefit from
bridging the perception gap between data and insight through design.      Frey, M. (2007) Rotor D/64.
                                                                          Retrieved online 27/3/2019 from http://maxfrey.net/index.php/rotor-d64-2007.html
                                                                          Gallagher, S. (2006). How the Body Shapes the Mind. Oxford University Press
                                                                          Gibson, J.J. (1966). The Senses considered as Perceptual Systems. Oxford: Houghton
                                                                          Mifflin.
                                                                          Gibson, J.J. (1979). The Ecological Approach to Visual Perception. Hillsdale, NJ:
                                                                          Lawrence Erlbaum.
                                                                          Gumtau, S. (2015). Between Craft and Code: Making Sense of Data Materialisation.
                                                                          Exhibition in Portsmouth, UK Retrieved online 5/4/2019 from https://researchportal.
                                                                          port.ac.uk/portal/en/publications/between-craft-and-code(4f0ed5d9-bc94-4c0e-8ce3-
                                                                          07504ea1e027).html
                                                                          Lakoff, G & Johnson, M. (1980). Metaphors We Live By. Chicago: University of Chicago
                                                                          Press
                                                                          Johnson, M. (1987). The Body in the Mind: The Bodily Basis of Meaning, Imagination,
                                                                          and Reason. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
                                                                          Johnson, M. (2007). The Meaning of the Body – Aesthetics of Human Understanding.
                                                                          Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
                                                                          Lee, Eon-Song (2010). Knowledge Resource in Maritime Transport Industry: A Case
                                                                          Analysis. In The Asian Journal of Shipping and Logistics, 26(2), pp297-340
                                                                          Medina, J. (2010). Crippled Cruise Ship Reaches Shore. In The New York Times, Nov.
                                                                          11, 2010 Retrieved 25/3/2019 from https://www.nytimes.com/2010/11/12/us/12cruise.
                                                                          html
                                                                          Merleau-Ponty, M (2002). The Phenomenology of Perception. London: Routledge
                                                                          (Original work published 1962)
                                                                          Milmo, D. (2013). The Decline of the UK Shipbuilding Industry was not Inevitable. In The
                                                                          Guardian, 6th November 2013
                                                                          Retrieved online 28/3/2019 from https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/nov/06/
                                                                          uk-shipbuilding-industry-bae-portsmouth
                                                                          Nöe, A. (2004). Action in Perception. Cambrigde, MA: MIT Press
                                                                          Ramachandran, V.S. (2003). Purple Numbers and Sharp Cheese. Reith Lectures on The
                                                                          Emerging Mind, BBC Radio 4. Retrieved online 3/4/2019 from http://www.bbc.co.uk/
                                                                          radio4/reith2003/lecture4.shtml
                                                                          Rankin, J. (2013). BAE ends shipbuilding in Portsmouth and Axes 1800 jobs. In The
                                                                          Guardian, 6th November 2013
                                                                          Risch, J. (2008). On the role of Metaphor in Information Visualization. In arXiv.org
                                                                          Retrieved online from https://arxiv.org/abs/0809.0884 on 28/3/2019
                                                                          Reed, E. S. (1995). The Ecological Approach to Language Development: A Radical
                                                                          Solution to Chomsky and Quine’s Problems’. Language & Communication, 15(1), 1-17.

146                                                                                                                                                                  147
Schindlig, E. (2010) Sphere. In Klanten, R. (Ed) Data Flow v. 2: Visualising Information in
Graphic Design. Gestalten Verlag
Seitz, J.A. (2000). The Bodily Basis of Thought. New Ideas in Psychology. 18(1), 23-40.
Seitz, J.A. (2005). The Neural, Evolutionary, Developmental, and Bodily Basis of
Metaphor. New Ideas in Psychology, 23(2), 74-95.
Vessel Efficiency (n.d.) Retrieved online 25/3/2019 from https://connect.innovateuk.org/
web/vessel-efficiency
Winton, J. (1989). The Naval Heritage of Portsmouth. Southampton: Ensign
Zagami, P. (2010). Static Movements. In Klanten, R. (Ed) Data Flow v. 2: Visualising
Information in Graphic Design. Gestalten Verlag
Zhao, J. & Vande Moere, A. (2008). Embodiment in Data sculpture: A Model of the
Physical Visualization of Information. In Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference
on Digital Interactive Media in Entertainment and Arts, pp. 343-350
Proceedings of the 3rd international conference on Digital Interactive Media in
Entertainment and Arts Pages 343-350




148                                                                                           149
              Designing a
             sensibility for
      sustainable clothing
           (S4S): Affective
                   activism
       Fiona Hackney, Clare Saunders, Joanie Willett and
                                              Katie Hill
150                                                   151
Abstract                                                                    community groups in dialogic reflexive workshops that both mimic and
The need to improve the sustainability of fashion has been widely noted     reimagine phases of the lifecycle of clothing by, for instance: making
by academics (Black 2012, Fletcher 2008, 2016), activist campaigns          fibre and fabric; making, modifying and mending clothes; up-cycling,
(Greenpeace, Fashion Revolution) and policy makers (DEFRA, EAC).            repurposing and dealing with waste fabric. The underlying thesis is that
While there have been creative attempts to provoke sustainable fashion,     engaging in such activities will not only raise consciousness about the
few studies have explored ways in which making fibre, using ‘waste’         appalling effects of the fast fashion industry, but also help to change
fabric and modifying clothes might change individuals’ behaviour            everyday behaviour through affectual engagement with dress and
(thoughts, feelings and actions ) in relation to how they dress. This       textiles communities and processes, skills, materials and methods. As
chapter will present, analyse and reflect on work-in-progress research      such, S4S proposes a mode of ‘quietly’ affective, everyday activism that
from the Arts and Humanities Research Council (AHRC)-funded project         is embedded in, stems from and is transmitted through communities
‘Designing a Sensibility for Sustainable Clothing (S4S)’, which combines    (Hackney, 2013a), a lived, embodied equivalent to partner Fashion
arts with social science methods to investigate how creative activities     Revolution’s global activism. Research draws on data from a rich mix
might shape a ‘sensibility’ for sustainable clothing and promote pro-       of social science and arts methods, including co-generated creative
environmental behaviour change. Drawing on social design thinking,          outputs, in-depth interviews, short reflective videos, wardrobe audits,
the project works with communities to co-produce knowledge through          clothing diaries and surveys. For the purposes of this chapter analysis
‘hands on’ making. It involves community groups in dialogic, reflexive      will focus on findings from two areas that demonstrate the benefits of a
workshops that mimic phases of the lifecycle of clothing (making fibre      combined quantitative and qualitative approach: 1) preliminary surveys;
and fabric, purchasing, mending, modifying and making clothes,              2) film screening workshops.
and dealing with waste fabric) and has produced a rich array of data
including co-generated creative outputs, in-depth interviews, short         Extant research reveals the difficulty of reversing fast fashion. Even those
reflective videos, wardrobe audits, clothing diaries and surveys. In        aware of fashion’s externalities can get caught in a value-behaviour
collaboration with partner Fashion Revolution, the project proposes         gap since quality fast-fashion items are more readily available in the
these methods as a mode of quietly affective activism that is embedded      marketplace and out-compete eco-fashion (Moon et al., 2015; D’Souza,
in, stems from, and is fuelled by everyday lived experience (Hackney,       2015). To effect change we have to locate clothing behaviour within
2013a). Fashion industries, cultures and imaginaries are multi-faceted      wider formations of identity, attachment, socially constructed values and
and complex with significant social and environmental consequences.         psychological drives. Part of the answer lies not only in our intellectual
Drawing on theories of affect (Ahmed, 2004), S4S findings suggest that      but also our affectual relationship with fashion, its deep connections
participatory design and crafts practices offer an affective response to    with individual identities that are themselves rooted in socio-
the pressing problem of fashion’s devastating environmental effects.        cultural attachments (Cassidy and Bennett, 2012; Kaiser, 2012). Such
                                                                            complexities underpin the project’s focus on the notion of ‘sensibility’.
Introduction                                                                Defined in the Cambridge Dictionary as ‘an understanding of or ability
The dangers of ‘fast fashion’: a ‘buy now, throw away tomorrow’             to decide about what is good or valuable, especially in connection with
culture (Birtwhistle et al., 2003; Michon et al., 2015) are increasingly    artistic or social activities’ and in the Oxford Dictionary as the ‘quality of
known. High street and online retailers, motivated by economic              being able to appreciate and respond to complex emotional or aesthetic
drivers, provide low cost garments often designed to be worn only           influences’, a sustainable fashion sensibility suggests the ability to
a few times. Clothes are manufactured to a lower quality than even          identify, develop and practice a new set of clothing qualities, values
in the recent past and garments are rarely thrown away because they         and behaviours. Thinking about sensibility, moreover, foregrounds
are worn out. Young women in particular prefer to buy several cheap         emotion as a driver of change in making sustainable fashion choices,
disposable fashion items rather than one durable piece, while low costs     as Otto Von Busch argued in his recent keynote at the Global Fashion
discourage consumers from repairing worn out clothes (Morgan and            conference, LCF, 2018. Finally, the notion of forging a new sensibility for
Birtwhistle, 2009; Binotto and Payne, 2017). While designers such as        sustainability is valuable because it involves both change in our outer
Katherine Hamnett and Phoebe English, and design researchers such           ‘sensible’ lives - from physical sensations to sociability – and our inner
as Professor Dilys Williams and her colleagues at University of the Arts    thoughts, subjectivities and imaginaries.
London (UAL) (Black, 2012; Fletcher, 2012; Erhman, 2018), play a crucial
role in critiquing and rethinking fashion from the perspective of design,   Fashion is not solely the preserve of global corporations, it is also
manufacture and textile technologies, less work has been done on how        about individual experience. As Dilys Williams recently observed on a
changes in consumer/user behaviour might address this situation. The        radio programme about environmental change, fashion makes ‘climate
Arts & Humanities Research Council-funded (AHRC) project Designing          change human in scale because each day each of us makes a decision
a Sensibility for Sustainable Clothing (S4S) aims to do this by involving   about what we buy, what we wear, how we value it, how we care for
                                                                            it’ (Fidgen, 2019). Furthermore, we know that buying things does not
152                                                                                                                                                          153
increase happiness. Psychologist Lorraine Whitmarsh, speaking on the          to the field of sustainable fashion and design (Fletcher 2016). Third, it
same programme, identified three fundamental psychological human              contributes to research on behaviour change. Dominant approaches
needs that drive our actions and behaviour: 1) Autonomy through               to behaviour change, which focus on information and fiscal incentives,
experiencing an element of freedom of choice; 2) Competence that              have limited efficacy due to the value-behaviour gap. A novel aspect of
comes from feeling good about doing something; and 3) Relatedness,            the project is its use of the concept of ‘affect’, which refers to how socio-
which fulfils our need for social bonds with people. Significantly, all       political contexts and emotional responses shape how people learn
three featured prominently in S4S videos, participant reflection and          and behave. Affect is particularly relevant to fashion and consumerism,
discussion. Policy makers are more alert than ever to the damaging social     since the current economic system ‘mines affect for value’ by generating
and environmental effects of the fashion industry. Recommendations by         emotional responses to sell products and make profit (Clough, 2008).
the All Party Parliamentary Group on Ethics and Sustainability in Fashion     This is most notable in celebrity culture (Morgan and Birtwhistle, 2009),
and DEFRA’s Sustainable Clothing Roadmap (DEFRA 2011) have recently           but it also pervades self-identification with clothing (Guy and Banim,
been supplemented by an intensive interrogation of fast fashion by the        2000) in relation to peer approval (Roper and La Neice, 2009). Clothes
cross-party Environmental Audit Committee (EAC). The latter’s report          generate culturally resonant affective markers of popular aesthetics
into the Sustainability of the Fashion Industry closes with an urgent         and symbolic meanings that determine how individuals communicate
call to action: the ‘current exploitative and environmentally damaging        their identities to others (Schofield and Schmidt, 2005). Integral to
model for fashion must change’ (HoC, 2019a). S4S recommendations              understanding ‘affect’ is recognition that emotions can be seen as
for reinvigorating the high street with spaces dedicated to skill sharing,    sticky markers which attach to things and ideas, shaping how they are
making and mending, repurposing, swapping, and clothes rentals are            absorbed into identities. Understanding how to encourage a sensibility
featured in the EAC’s final report, Fixing Fashion: Clothing Consumption      for sustainable clothing choices thus requires us to unpick the layers of
and Sustainability. Fashion: it shouldn’t cost the earth, (HoC, 2019b),       emotional attachments that underpin human responses to what might
suggesting one way in which the S4S method for promoting more                 otherwise seem to be ‘rational’ choices and transfer them to more
sustainable clothing behaviour might be scaled up, or more properly           sustainable behaviours.
scaled across, by connecting multiple agencies.
                                                                              In order to explore this the team developed a range of research
Method and Methodology                                                        methods and tools, including: experiential workshops involving ‘making
S4S is an interdisciplinary collaboration between researchers in the social   interventions’ (Hackney et al, 2016a), questionnaires, in-depth wardrobe
sciences and the humanities: politics academics at University of Exeter       audits, clothing diaries, interviews and short reflexive video films, to
and arts research practitioners at the University of Wolverhampton.           replace standard notions of production and consumption with material,
The project also involves external partners: community organisations in       sensory and emotional practices generated within communities (Clay
Cornwall and the West Midlands, sustainable fashion designers Antiform,       and Bradley Foster, 2007). A conceptual framework around processes
the campaign and advocacy group Fashion Revolution, and a group               of thinking, feeling and doing: ‘think, feel, act’ was devised and
of specialist design, fashion, and environmental advisors. Concurrent         embedded in mini-questionnaires, longer interviews, group discussion
linked launch events in Cornwall and the West Midlands attracted over         and film-making to help participants identify and reflect on and their
a hundred people to listen to sustainable fashion experts, participate        responses throughout the project. The workshops were designed
in maker workshops and help shape project research questions and              to mimic and rework the lifecycle of clothing, from production to
themes. The forty people who elected to become involved in the                consumption and disposal, by enabling participants to rethink their
project proper went on to attend between five and twenty workshops            relationship with the fashion system through processes of engaged,
and participate in project research methods . Twelve participants             participatory making (Barthes, 1990/1967/; Kaiser, 2012). They include
attended all twenty workshops in Cornwall while twenty-eight took part        a range of activities, from spinning fibre, weaving fabric and natural
in at least five, and in some cases all twenty, workshops held in the West    dyeing processes, deconstructing and reconstructing knitted garments
Midlands. All workshops lasted for a full day and they ran over a period      and bespoke pattern cutting, to make-do-and-mend, up-cycling and
of nine months in total. Around twenty people engaged in wardrobe             repurposing charity items, embellishment as visible repair, and leather-
audits, counting, logging and talking about items they own (Fletcher          working (Figures 1 & 2). The workshops were conceptualised as spaces
and Grimstad Klepp, 2017).                                                    ‘in between’ the flow of fast fashion which short-circuited it through
                                                                              creative interventions that foregrounded the quality, skill, labour and
The project draws from three main strands of research. First, it extends      environmental impacts conventionally hidden in mainstream discourse.
work on social design, co-design, and the relationship between crafts         Skype conversations, film viewings, social media, and the reciprocal
and material affect (Armstrong et al., 2014; Kimbell, 2011; Hackney et        exchange of collaboratively produced items at the end of each set of
al., 2016a and 2016b; Twigger Holroyd, 2017). Second, it contributes          workshops, enabled groups in different regions to communicate and
                                                                              learn from one another.
154                                                                                                                                                           155
                                                                             Figure 1.       it was to provide the spaces for conversation so we could understand
                                                                             Make-do-        more about how participants felt about clothes, and the kind of learning
                                                                             and-mend        journey that they were on. Here, the act of doing and being through
                                                                             workshop,
                                                                                             the material act of making facilitated a more in-depth understanding
                                                                             Chyan Fields,
                                                                             Cornwall        of how individuals constructed their phenomenalogical lifeworlds
                                                                                             around clothing (Mead, 1934; Blumer ,1992; Goffman, 1959; Lee 2016).
                                                                                             Secondly, the tasks in themselves were designed to enable participants
                                                                                             to learn about the journeys that clothing takes (for example, making
                                                                                             yarn or fabric from raw materials); the kinds of ethical questions that are
                                                                                             raised by fast fashion (eg. The human and environmental costs of mass
                                                                                             consumption of cheap clothing); and to learn skills to make, mend, and
                                                                                             modify clothing themselves.

                                                                                             Participants in both locations were introduced to four series of
                                                                                             workshops, familiarising them with various aspects of the clothes making
                                                                                             process. The workshops followed iterative themes that responded
                                                                                             to, and built on, one another: 1) Fluff to Fibre: spinning, dyeing and
                                                                                             weaving yarn; 2) (De)Constructive/(Re)Constructive Knitting: un-picking
                                                                             Figure 2.       and re-making garments; 3) Towards Zero Waste: learning about the
                                                                             Visible Mend-   problem of global textiles waste; 4) Vintage Pattern Cutting: making
                                                                             ing, West       patterns and garments using 1940s techniques and waste materials; 5)
                                                                             Midlands        Make-Do-And-Mend: learning and applying sewing, darning and repair
                                                                                             techniques; 6) (In)Visible Mending: using stich techniques such as needle
                                                                                             weaving and goldwork to embellish stains, rips and tears in clothing; 7)
                                                                                             Second-Hand and Ethical: charity shopping, adapting and re-making
                                                                                             garments; 8) Re-Make, Re-Purpose, Upcycle: upcycling, repurposing
                                                                                             existing garments and making new artefacts from waste leather. A set
                                                                                             of colourful leaflets, including workshop summaries, participant quotes,
                                                                                             and instructions about skills and techniques, is available in print form
                                                                                             and will be downloadable from project website (currently in process
                                                                                             https//www.sites.exeter.ac.uk/s4s).

                                                                                             The Cornwall group was formed in the initial phases of the project, and
                                                                                             although there was some attrition, most participants remained involved
                                                                                             in some way over the duration of the study. Due to the wider geographic
                                                                                             spread, working with partner organisations, West Midlands participants
                                                                                             were asked to attend a minimum of four sessions in any of the four
Our method, which combined quantitative social science method                                workshop series. The majority in fact were present at far more than
with qualitative practice-based arts research, was underpinned by                            this, some being involved in all twenty. All the Cornwall participants
‘embodied research’ approach, which invites participants to use their                        were female with most aged around or under thirty. The West Midlands
bodies to explore and generate knowledges (Spatz, 2017; Thanem and                           group included a more diversity in terms of age and gender, including
Knights, 2019; Vachelli, 2018). The principle combines the emphasis                          teenagers and three men. As the workshops progressed people began
on activity and learning as part of the research process found in more                       to invite friends and family along, and a number of parent/child teams
action-oriented research with a focus on the physical and emotional                          developed (Figure 3). The workshops were recorded and transcribed,
use of the body. The benefits of using this kind of methodological tool                      and participants were asked to keep a reflective ‘clothing diary’
is that participants are provided with the spaces and opportunity to                         recording details about the skills they learned, their participation in
connect and reflect on the topic matter in depth through engaged social                      the group, the garments they made, and to what extent and how their
material practices as they make and talk together (Hackney et al 2016a).                     thoughts, feelings and actions around sustainable clothing changed. All
In this respect, the research is both informative, and transformative                        data was inductively thematised following the principles of grounded
(Heras and Tabera, 2014). There were two objects to the activity. Firstly,                   theory (Charmaz 2006; Strauss and Corin 2008) looking specifically
156                                                                                                                                                                        157
at the ideas and affective emotions (Ahmed 2004) that participants                             19 of 23 that they had purchased clothes from a fast fashion retailer in
attached to clothes, the various aspects of the clothes making process,                        the past 2 years. However, a minority would be tempted to purchase
the materiality of clothing, and how participants felt about clothing                          fast-fashion in a sale (only 4 of 18 said they would do so). Their overall
choices. These themes were then coded for further analysis, clustering                         spending on clothes appeared, on average, to have increased from pre-
around: how people feel about clothes; how they shop; clothes and                              to post-participation.
ethics; the process of making, mending, and modifying clothing;
creating behaviour change.                                                                     Of our 22 participants with valid answers to the question on clothing
                                                                                               spend in both the pre- and post- survey, 9 had increased their monthly
Quantitative Data Analysis, Style and Practice                                                 clothes spend, 8 had remained the same and 5 had reduced it. Of the
A quasi-experimental questionnaire was devised asking participants                             12 spending less than £20 per month at the start of the project, four
for self-reported assessments of skills, attitudes and behaviours before                       had maintained a low spend, and 7 had increased to £20-50. Of the
and after engaging with the workshops. This enables us to gather a                             five participants who spent £20-50 at the start of the project, three
quantitative measure of the effects of the workshops in relation to how                        had remained the same, one had increased to £100-200 and one had
                                                                                               reduced to £5-10. One participant spending £50-100 kept her spending
                                                                              Figure
                                                                                               constant, but another had reduced from £50-100 to less than £20 per
                                                                              3. Moth-
                                                                              er-daugh-
                                                                                               month. All 3 of our participants who used to spend more than £100 a
                                                                              ter team         month on clothes had reduced their spending: one to less than £20 per
                                                                              repurposing      month, another to £20-50 and the third to £50-100.
                                                                              maternity
                                                                              wear, Antiform   That some participants had increased their clothes spend seems to
                                                                              workshop,        be related to their more discerning tastes post-participation, as they
                                                                              West Mid-        increasingly sought more ethical – and presumably more expensive –
                                                                              lands
                                                                                               fashion items. In Table 2, we show the mean scores (where 1=not at
                                                                                               all and 5=very much) for a range of factors that influence decisions to
                                                                                               purchase clothes. Despite the low sample size, the mean scores are a
                                                                                               good summary of the data given the low variance in responses across
                                                                                               our participants. Table 2 also includes the standard deviations of the
                                                                                               mean, which give an indication of the high measure of fit of the mean to
                                                                                               the majority of participants. After taking part in the workshops, people
                                                                                               are markedly more influenced in their buying choices by the quality
                                                                                               of the fibre and construction, the brand and locally produced clothing
                                                                                               items. They are also slightly less concerned about what their peers think
people think, feel and act about their clothing. Our approach illustrates                      about their clothing choices and, overall, never concerned about being
the value of survey research for making such assessments and the                               in fashion.
considerable multi-faceted effects that our workshops have had on our
participants.

We asked our participants to provide a list of their top five shops for
purchasing clothes. We then characterised these as: high street, charity,
online, vintage and reused. The majority of the twenty two participants
for whom we have valid pre- and post-participation answers preferred
to list high street sources both before (on average 2.8 out of 5) and after
(on average 2.2 out of 5) workshop participation, with a very slight shift
away from the high street towards charity shops (mean before =0.6,
mean after = 0.7).

Most of our participants (16 of 20 valid answers) reported that they
would ‘not continue to buy fast fashion’ in general except for essentials,
like underwear. This marks a significant change from the claim made by

158                                                                                                                                                                         159
  Factors that influence            Mean score before (1-5)       Mean score after (1-5)    Table 1:       Feeling Film, Aesthetic Affect
  purchasing choice (n=26)                                                                  Factors that   Short video films were made iteratively throughout the workshops and
  Quality of fibre                        3.6 (SD 1.18)               4.6 (SD 0.80)         influence      from the outset this was envisaged as integral to research activities. The
  Country of origin                       2.0 (SD 1.16)                    4.1 (1.22)       clothes        film-makers: Nina Constable in Cornwall (www.ninaconstable.co.uk) and
                                                                                            purchas-       R & A Collaborations in the West Midlands (www.racollaborations.co.uk )
  Quality of construction /               3.9 (SD 0.95)                    4.4 (0.95)
                                                                                            ing choice     operated as co-researchers, sometimes participating in discussion and
  manufacture
                                                                                            before and     making activities (Figure 4). Over thirty short films have are available
  Price                                   4.3 (SD 0.95)                    4.0 (0.76)       after our      on the S4S You tube channel along with ‘Resolution’ a twenty-minute
  Brand                                   2.6 (SD 1.31)                    4.1 (0.95)       workshops      summary of the project and its findings (S4S Films, 2019). Academic
  Locally produced                        2.6 (SD 1.20)                    4.1 (0.84)                      work on community film is growing (Malik et al, 2017) and S4S builds on
                                                                                                           earlier research by team members who used film as a reflexive device
  Being in fashion                        2.1 (SD 1.26)                    2.0 (2.03)
                                                                                                           for community craft groups (Hackney, 2014; Rana and Hackney, 2018).
  What peers think                        2.0 (SD 1.16)                    1.6 (1.62)                      The films were intended to operate as a discursive device helping
                                                                                                           participants to better understand their own and others’ experience of
Notes: SD refers to the standard deviation of the mean, which indicates                                    the workshops, to what extent and how their ideas, attitudes to and
that the majority of cases in the sample fall just a small distance from                                   feelings about clothes, their clothing habits and behaviours, might
the mean.                                                                                                  change.
                                                                                                                                                                                        Figure 4 Nina
A battery of agree-disagree (5-point likert scale) questions further                                                                                                                    Constable
reveals the impacts that our workshops had upon our participants in                                                                                                                     filming while
relation to thinking carefully about what they buy, learning new skills,                                                                                                                the Cornwall
buying fewer items, finding new meaning, sourcing clothes ethically,                                                                                                                    Group spin
thinking differently about how they dress and being more likely to fix
their clothes (Table 2). Strikingly, few reported that they have changed
their style, suggesting an enduring emotive connection with style,
despite shifting preferences towards more ethical attitudes to clothing.
Less than half acquired new equipment, such as a sewing machine.
The effects of the workshop series might be compromised because the
‘things’ that facilitate behaviour change are no longer readily available.



  Category Impact (n=26)                                               Number agreeing or   Table 2:
                                                                       strongly agreeing
                                                                                            Thinking,
  Think      I think more carefully about the clothes I buy            23                   feeling and
  Feel       I feel more empathy for the people who make my clothes    22                   acting im-
  Act        I am more likely to fix my broken clothes                 22
                                                                                            pacts of our   As the project progressed the film makers began to identify themes
                                                                                            workshops      that underpinned an emerging sustainable fashion sensibility. These
  Act        I have learned new skills                                 22
                                                                                                           include: identity (Jack’s Jumper), changing values (Value), time (The
  Feel       I feel I have made new friends                            21                                  Gift of Time), economy (Being Thrifty), affective connection (The
  Act        I buy fewer new items of clothing                         20                                  Ripple Effect), community and communication (Group Chats), science
  Act        I try to find out who made my clothes                     19                                  and environment (Detergent Test), family (Family Influences), abilities
                                                                                                           and asset-building (Hidden Potential), media (Unravel: The True Cost),
  Act        I increasingly source my clothes ethically                19
                                                                                                           heritage (Reclaiming the 1940s), facilitation and learning (Hanny’s
  Feel       I find different meaning in the clothes I wear            16                                  Workshops), skill-building (Upcycle), and material practice (Make-Do-
  Think      I think differently about how I dress                     15                                  And-Mend). Screening workshops gathered feedback about participant
  Act        I have acquired new equipment                             12                                  responses. The degree to which the films prompted an emotional
  Act/feel   I have changed my style                                   8
                                                                                                           connection with the project was immediately apparent. West Midlands
                                                                                                           participants felt that they rekindled ‘the feeling … from doing the

160                                                                                                                                                                                              161
workshops together and then the feeling can come back through the             of use, the social milieu in which clothes are worn, cared for, appreciated
films’. Watching them in chronological order, moreover, they noticed          and become socially meaningful, and the mentality through which
how they communicate a journey: ‘[T]hat very first opening sort of            they become markers of identification on a deeper psychological
session I don’t think we really were aware of what kind of journey we         level. The combination of social science and arts research methods
were really going to step onto … You can start to see the change              provide quantitative and qualitative insights into this process helping
happening … It’s changing, it’s changing your habit pattern isn’t it’.        us to better understand and assess, not only the changes that are
                                                                              taking place when participants engage in this kind of work but also the
These perceptions of filmic affect as an emotional conduit and memetic        context, conditions and motivations for change. They also suggest the
device can be linked to the films’ aesthetic qualities, whereby colour,       ways in which a sensibility for sustainable clothing might disseminate,
texture, detail, light, close-ups, personal narratives, and temporal          as participants take ownership of the research methods and techniques
slowness convey values of trust, intimacy and honesty, and a sense            (workshops, films, diaries, design, stitch skills) and embed them in their
of emotional closeness and pleasure, something that may be equally            lives as tools for behaviour change.
available to wider audiences (Hackney, 2013b). Cornwall participants
noted that the film narratives felt true to their experience of the           An affectual economy of making emerged as participants connected
workshops, communicating a sense of authenticity that would appeal            with their clothes in new embodied ways. Inductive analysis of project
to others. One West Midlands’ participant saw the films as connecting         data uncovered the ideas and affective emotions that were attached to
people with the experience of working in a community even when                clothes, the making process, the materiality of clothing, and how people
working alone. Another talked about how they communicate the ethos            felt about their clothing choices with a focus on: feelings about clothes,
of the project and the pleasure of participation: ‘[A]s a body of work it’s   shopping and ethics, processes of making, mending and modifying
a lovely, a lovely portfolio to look at and just kind of keep remembering     clothing, and creating behaviour change. The films prompted group
some of the ethos … it’s reminding that actually when we do things            discussion about the social and environmental impacts of fast fashion,
together we’re probably more productive as well [and] by doing things         but this was framed within a context of lived experience and personal
together it becomes a pleasurable thing rather than a weight on your          connection. They reconnected people with the ‘feelings’ experienced
shoulders you know’. A third, projecting into the future, thought that the    during participation, something identified as a motivator for future
films will help to keep feelings and habits formed during the workshops       behaviour change. Continuity, meanwhile, thrived alongside change.
alive for her:                                                                The questionnaires reveal that as clothing thinking and practice
                                                                              became more ethical, an individual’s perceived sense of style, and
      It’s been a nice reminder of the journey actually and I think I         identity, remained unchanged. The workshop materials (booklets) and
      probably will watch them to keep my momentum going myself.              accompanying films show how participants adapted project learning
      I think the changes have been made up here so when I go and             and methods to reinforce/develop style/identities by making and
      buy new clothes or, you know, I’m looking at where they’re from         reshaping their garments as the tyranny of fast fashion loosened its
      I’m not necessarily going to go to those cheap chains anymore.          hold, at least to some degree.
      So that’s kind of, that’s integrally changed. But I think it’s too
      easy to get wrapped up in so once you move away from the                The questionnaires and films evidence behaviour change in related and
      project … if I sustain it I’m going to get the feeling back again.      complementary ways. Many participants have restricted their shopping,
      (West Midland’s participant, 2018)                                      buying from charity shops or swapping, repairing and upcycling
                                                                              clothing. A number have not bought any new clothes, taking a pledge
The films helped her ‘get the feeling back’ of embodied affective             to buy second-hand or swap with friends and family, accepting new
participation becoming, not only a prompt but also the emotional              clothes only as gifts. Fast fashion began to be judged as unacceptably
glue forging a felt sensibility for sustainable clothing by attaching         poor in quality and not worth the social and environmental ‘cost’. As
experiences, things and ideas to identities.                                  their affectual relationship with clothing shifted, several remarked
                                                                              that buying new clothes just didn’t ‘feel right’. The Cornwall group
Conclusions                                                                   emphasised the importance of developing a self-reflective mentality: to
While the shock effect of films such as The True Cost (Morgan, 2015)          slow down and ‘pause’ before buying, asking oneself, ‘do I really need
and Stacey Dooley’s documentary Fashion’s Dirty Secrets (2018) raise          this item? How and where was it made? How can I look after it?’.
awareness about problems in the industry, they are less helpful in
providing strategies for change. Designing a sensibility for sustainable      A West Midlands participant declared that the workshops made change
clothing, in contrast, approaches the problem from the ground up,             seem achievable because ‘they weren’t about saving the world, they
affectively and experientially including: point of purchase, the context      were about darning’. Both groups agreed that change had occurred
                                                                              gradually through a ‘process of doing things with the group’ rather than
162                                                                                                                                                         163
any prescriptive demands ‘directly stopping you buying things’. They      References
also described how they might deploy their learning, repopulating
the high street with making spaces, running classes in schools, or        Ahmed, S. (2004) The Cultural Politics of Emotion, Edinburgh: Edinburgh University
adapting workshop methods to challenges for Girl Guides, for instance,    Press.
signalling the power of an affectual activism that is ‘quietly’ enacted   Armstrong, L., Bailey, J., Julier, G. and Kimbell, L. (2014), Social Design Futures: HEI
and embedded in everyday life.                                            Research and the AHRC [Report for Arts and Humanities Research Council] Published
                                                                          online by University of Brighton. http://eprints.brighton.ac.uk/13364/ [accessed
                                                                          18.10.2018]
                                                                          Barthes, R. (1990/1967) Ward, M. and Howard, R. (Trans) The Fashion System, California
                                                                          and London: University of California Press.
                                                                          Binotto, C. & Payne, A. (2017) “The Poetics of Waste: Contemporary Fashion Practice in
                                                                          the Context of Wastefulness,” Fashion Practice, 9(1), pp. 5-29.
                                                                          Birtwistle, G., Siddiqui, N. and Fiorito, S. S. (2003) “Quick response: perceptions of UK
                                                                          fashion retailers,” International Journal of Retail & Distribution Management, 31(2), pp.
                                                                          118-128.
                                                                          Black, S. (2012) The Sustainable Fashion Handbook, London: Thames & Hudson.
                                                                          Blumer, H. (1992) Symbolic Interactionism: Perspective and Method, Chicago: Chicago
                                                                          University Press.
                                                                          Cassidy, T. D. and Bennett, H.R. (2012) “The Rise of Vintage Fashion and the Vintage
                                                                          Consumer,” Fashion Practice, 4(2), pp. 239-261.
                                                                          Charmaz, K. (2006) Constructing Grounded Theory: A Practical Guide Through
                                                                          Qualitative Analysis, London: Sage Publications.
                                                                          Clay, D. and Bradley Foster, H. (2007) Dress Sense Emotional and Sensory Experiences
                                                                          of the Body and Clothes, Oxford: Berg.
                                                                          Clough, P. T. (2008) “The Affective Turn: Political Economy, Biomedia and Bodies,”
                                                                          Theory, Culture & Society. 25(1), pp. 1–22.
                                                                          DEFRA, Department of Fisheries, Environment and Rural Affairs (2012) Sustainable
                                                                          Clothing Roadmap 2011 Progress Report. https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/
                                                                          government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/69299/pb13461-clothing-
                                                                          actionplan-110518.pdf [Accessed 07/01/2019]
                                                                          D’Souza, C., Gilmore, A. J., Hartmann, P., Apaolaza Ibáñez, V. and Sullivan-Mort, G.
                                                                          (2015) “Male eco-fashion,” International Journal of Consumer Studies, 39, pp. 35-42.
                                                                          EAC, Environmental Audit Committee (2019) Fixing Fashion: clothing, consumption
                                                                          and sustainability. Fashion: it shouldn’t cost the earth. 19 February HC 1952.
                                                                          https://www.parliament.uk/business/committees/committees-a-z/commons-select/
                                                                          environmental-audit-committee/inquiries/parliament-2017/sustainability-of-the-
                                                                          fashion-industry-17-19/
                                                                          Ehrman, E. (Ed.) (2018) Fashioned From Nature. London: Victoria & Albert Museum
                                                                          Fidgen, J. (2019) Clothes: New Year Solutions. BBC Radio 4. 2. January.
                                                                          Fletcher, K. (2012) Fashion and Sustainability: Design for Change. London: Lawrence
                                                                          King.
                                                                          Fletcher, K. (2016), Craft of Use: Post Growth Fashion. London and New York: Routledge.
                                                                          Fletcher, K. and Grimstad Klepp, I. (eds.) (2017) Opening Up the Wardrobe: A Methods
                                                                          Book, Oslo: Novus Press.
                                                                          Goffman, E. (1959) The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life, London: Random House.
                                                                          Guy, A. and Banim, M. (2000) “Personal Collections: Women’s clothing use and identity,”
                                                                          Journal of Gender Studies, 9(3), pp. 313-327.
                                                                          Hackney, F., Maughan and H., Desmarais, S. (2016a) “The Power of Quiet: Re-Making
                                                                          Amateur and Professional Textiles Agencies,” Journal of Textile Design, Research &
                                                                          Practice, 4, pp. 34-62.


164                                                                                                                                                                   165
Hackney, F. and Maughan, H. (2016b) “Stitched Together: Community Learning,                   Schofield, K. and Schmidt, R. (2005) “Fashion and clothing: The construction and
Collaborative Making,” Futurescan 3: Journal of Fashion in Higher Education. JFHE 3,          communication of gay identities,” International Journal of Retail & Distribution
pp. 194-206.                                                                                  Management. 33(10).
Hackney, F. (2014) AHRC-funded project Co-Producing CARE: Community Asset-based               Spatz, B. (2017) “Embodied Resaerch: A Methodology,” Liminalities: A Journal of
Research & Enterprise. https://cocreatingcare.wordpress.com/the-project/ [Accessed            Performance Studies, 13 (2)
02.02.2019].
                                                                                              Strauss, A., Corbin, J., and Corin, J. (2008) Basics of Qualitative Research: Techniques
Hackney, F. (2013a) “Quiet Activism & the New Amateur: the power of home and hobby            and Procedures for Developing Grounded Theory, 2nd ed. Thousand Oaks: Sage
crafts,” Design and Culture, 5(2), pp. 169-194.                                               Publications.
Hackney, F. (2013b) “CAREful or CAREless? Collaborative Making and Social                     Thanem, T., Knights, D. (201) Embodied Research Methods, California: Sage.
Engagement through Craft,” in K. Raney (ed.), Critical Craft: engage 33 the international
                                                                                              TRAID (2018/19), 23 % see: https://www.traid.org.uk/23percent. [Accessed 06.02.2019]
journal of visual art and gallery education. London: engage, pp. 23-37.
                                                                                              Twigger Holroyd, A. (2017) Folk Fashion: Understanding Homemade Clothes, London
Heras, M., and Tabara, D. (2014) “Lets Play Transformations! Performative Methods for
                                                                                              and New York: IB Tauris.
Sustainability,” Sustainability Science 9: pp. 379–398.
                                                                                              Vachelli, E. (2018) Embodied Research in Migration Studies, Bristol: Policy Press.
House of Commons (HoC) (2019a) Interim Report on the Sustainability of the Fashion
Industry, UK Parliament Environmental Audit Committee: Sustainability of the Fashion
Industry Enquiry, 29 January. https://publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201719/
cmselect/cmenvaud/1148/114802.htm [Accessed 02.06.2019].
House of Commons (HoC) (2019b) Fixing Fashion: Clothing Consumption and                       Acknowledgements
Sustainability. Fashion: it shouldn’t cost the earth, UK Parliament Environmental Audit       This work was supported by the Arts and Humanities Research Council
Committee: Sustainability of the Fashion Industry Enquiry, 19 February, HC 1952.              [AH/K005243/1]. We would like to thank all our project participants,
https://publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201719/cmselect/cmenvaud/1952/1952.pdf                partners and advisors for their valued contributions.
Kaiser, S. (2012) Fashion and Cultural Studies, Oxford: Berg /Bloomsbury
Kimbell, L. (2011) “Rethinking design thinking: Part 1,” Design and Culture, 3(3), pp.
285-306.
Rana, M. and Hackney, F. (2018) “Making and Material Affect: From Learning and
Teaching to Sharing and Listening” in R. Prior (ed.) Using Art as Research in Learning
and Teaching: Multidisciplinary Approaches Across the Arts, Bristol & Chicago: Intellect.
Roper, S. and la Niece, C. (2009) “The importance of brands in the lunch-box choices of
low-income British school children,” Journal of Consumer Behaviour, 8(2-3), pp. 84-99.
Lee. Y. (2016) Seamlessness: Making and (Un)Knowing in Fashion Practice. Bristol:
Intellect.
Malik, S., Chapain, C., and Comunian, R. (2017) “Rethinking cultural diversity in the
UK film sector: Practices in community filmmaking,” Organization, 24(3), pp. 308–329.
Mead, G. (1934) Mind, Self, & Society: From the Standpoint of a Social Behaviourist,
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Michon, R., Chebat, J-C., Yu, H. and Lemarié, L. (2015) “Fashion orientation, shopping
mall environment, and patronage intentions: A study of female fashion shoppers,”
Journal of Fashion Marketing and Management, 19(1), 3-21.
Morgan, A. (2015) The True Cost, USA: Life Is My Movie Entertainment. Bullfrog Films
(home media).
Moon, K., Sze-Yeung Lai, C., Yee-Nee Lam, E., & Chang, J. (2015) “Popularization of
sustainable fashion: barriers and solutions,” The Journal of The Textile Institute, 106(9),
pp. 939-952.
Morgan, L. R., and Birtwistle, G. (2009) “An investigation of young fashion consumers’
disposal habits,” International Journal of Consumer Studies. 33(2), pp. 190-198.
S4S Films (2019) Designing a Sensibility for Sustainable Clothing: Youtube film channel:
https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCISPU0KuQXLMtSoLKRSE8E
[Accessed 06.02.2019]
S4S Project Website (2019) Designing a Sensibility for Sustainable Clothing: www.sites.
exeter.ac.uk/s4sS. [Accessed 06.02.2019]



166                                                                                                                                                                                      167
       So, what do you
        do? The role of
        design research
       in innovation for
      worklife inclusion
                 Lise Amy Hansen
168                           169
Abstract                                                                     work support (Figure 1). The project is currently midway and we will
This paper focuses on the role of design research in a large innovation      share some reflections and early findings from the process so far.
project in Norway – InnArbeid - where technology and services are
developed for social change. There are numerous policies in place and        The project was initiated by Sogndalen municipality in the south of
an increased awareness in Norway that agree to and support worklife          Norway, where they noticed that young people with ID where leaving
inclusion of young people with developmental, intellectual disabilities      school and increasingly struggled to find their place in working life.
(ID). Also, technological advances today could allow for a more diverse      Research confirms that in recent years there have been fewer - not more
workforce, yet the opposite is happening and their participation in          - people with ID in working life (Engeland & Langballe, 2017). This sits
working life is in decline. Our case then, presents a challenge where        against a broad political and general consensus that society should
even national policy together with a general consensus of agreement          facilitate such work participation.
and good intents do not lead to change, and we argue that design
research can play a role in teasing out novel areas of opportunity for       Key factors that challenge the research in developing innovations for
creating and in particular co-creating technology-supported services.        the transition from school into work, are that the end users are persons
This is through creating scenarios and dialogues where the user              with developmental disabilities, which entails cognitive and adaptive
involvement provides a radical expertise that may go across sectors and      functional impairments (ICD-10, 2011). Additionally, the transition from
silos and be put into play. Here design has a role through its explorative   upper secondary school to working life is part of a complex context
and adaptive nature as well as its wide applicability and – at times – as    involving many different actors with mutual dependencies (Holen-
a trouble-making, wishful and wicked approach to current needs and           Rabbesvik et al, forthcoming).
state of affairs.
                                                                             The project adopted an Action Design Research (ADR) which draws
We reflect on the strategies that underpin the research design towards       on action research and design science in information systems (Sein
innovation. Design is positioned as explorative and - for service            et al, 2011). The combination of action research and design science
design in particular - as a visually and holistically driven practice. We    provides an approach to open, complex and dynamic problems whilst
explain our thinking behind the use of design research approaches for        contributing with design research on general solutions. The aim is
developing sensitivity to emergent processes and involvements, and           to innovate beyond the problem situations which today’s situation
how they are blended with practical methods and skills in building           presents, and to enable a set of actors to become proactive in their
design knowledge. We will discuss three positionings of design               relationship to their environment (Dorst, 2015). Thus, the project is set
research within the InnArbeid project: as an experimental development        up partnering with the key actors in the life of young people with ID; from
(design school work), as co-created ideation and conceptualisations          the municipality to upper secondary school to health care, to assisted
(workshop involvements) and as well as the role of design research as        living to employers and colleagues. This broad involvement reflects
an overarching approach (research designs).                                  the systemic challenge of the project and to anchor the wider systemic
                                                                             changes through co-creation to ensure the ensuing implementation
In an innovation project, there is tension between creative explorations     (Murray et al., 2011).
and critical analysis on which we elaborate, by way of reflections on
                                                                                                                                                           Figure 1.
the development of our innovations. In particular, we look at how
                                                                                                                                                           Stills from
such a design-centred approach can provide access to nuanced yet                                                                                           the introduc-
meaningful, dimensions of knowledge. We conclude with a reflection                                                                                         tion film of
on the challenges involved in developing an explorative, yet critical                                                                                      the project
innovation approach grounded in co-design sensibility, and the need                                                                                        available at
for building communities of practice for ongoing design literacy in                                                                                        https://innar-
design research.                                                             Innovation for Norway’s public sector                                         beid.uia.no/
                                                                             The Norwegian public sector is now increasingly identifying a
                                                                             need to innovate its services, and several national plans support
The Innarbeid Project
                                                                             this (KS, Direktoratet for e-shelse & Helsedirektoratet 2019; Norsk
InnArbeid forms the case for this paper and frames the discussion on
                                                                             Forskningsråd., 2019a; Helse- og omsorgsdepartementet, 2013). At
the social turn in design research today. The three-year innovation
                                                                             the same time, the need is also increasingly facilitated through national
project’s aim is to contribute towards increased work participation for
                                                                             financial support schemes to initiate more innovation in the public
people with developmental, intellectual disabilities (ID). We will do this
                                                                             sector (e.g. Helsedirektoratet, 2019; NHO, KS & Difi, 2019; Norsk
by co-creating services towards four aspects: coordination and process
                                                                             Forskningsråd., 2019b). The InnArbeid project is financed as part of
support, everyday support, work application support and (staying in)
                                                                             such a strategic programme - the NFR Helsevel programme – where the
170                                                                                                                                                                   171
public sector is invited to be the initiator of innovation projects. It has   psychological and physical effects (Dalgård, 2006), and that it is
been shown that when the public sector employers themselves partake           particularly important to people with disabilities (Law et al.,1998).
in the practical experience of identifying users’ needs and co-create
service concepts, the public sector participant’s attitude towards service    The students were given access to the project’s ongoing research
innovation and user insights changed (Hansen, Kistorp & Almqvist,             findings through presentations, papers and project references and in
2016). Our ADR approach includes mapping of needs and co-creation,            particular the transcribed and anonymised interviews, workshops and
and the user involvement continues through the evaluation stages as           observations – the involvement of over 60 people thus far. They also
well as the implementation stages in iterative processes (Sein, 2011).        had access to the interdisciplinary research group and other partners
This proposes that the act of framing the problems and the solutions,         in the project.
involves a sequence of creative and critical steps (Dorst, 2019).
                                                                              Their early concepts were presented to central actors from the
For the InnArbeid project then it was central to have a close involvement     Department of Health in Oslo (Helseetaten) and Nordpolen Enterprises
of users and a transdisciplinary approach to the identification of            who working with young people with ID in policy and practice
underlying needs and themes. The main research group comprises health         respectively. The independent yet informed concepts introduced some
care, ethics, information systems, inter-organizational cooperation and       experimental and discursive aspects on the framing of the challenge of
service design. We have conducted interviews, workshops of various            getting young people with ID into work, as well as insights from their
forms and observations to be able to form an in-depth mapping of              own research from their own concept development. The presentation
needs whilst also creating engagements with the end users and the             afforded for Oslo municipality and Nordpolen Enterprises to give
other actors (Engström & Elg, 2015).                                          critical, real-world feedback, which was followed up in a co-creation
                                                                              workshop (Figure 2). With an overall challenge of such complexity, the
Below, we present three aspects in the InnArbeid innovation project           challenge is ‘to intervene in a way that makes the whole system move to
where design played a central role, in order to tease out some concerns       a more desired state’ (Dorst, 2019: 123). Working on the experimental
and considerations for design research towards social change. We will         and midway concepts formed a way for Helseetaten and Nordpolen to
first describe a design studio module with Master AHO student which           engage with InnArbeid by creating ways to implement reframings and
tackled the innovation project as a design brief. This is to describe         insights into new service design innovations.
some experimental and discursive aspects of design and how these                                                                                             Figure 2:
may feed innovation research. Next we describe a set of workshops that                                                                                       Early concept
were central for our user involvement – both to validate and challenge                                                                                       presentation
the user needs identified initially in the project - and to involve the                                                                                      and work-
various users and actors in ideation and concept development whilst                                                                                          shop with
informing and challenging the problem framing and the solution                                                                                               Helseetaten
spaces. Thirdly, we describe how the project group came about and                                                                                            and Nordpo-
                                                                                                                                                             len.
how we negotiate and collaborate on the various phases towards the
proposed innovations.
                                                                              Holistic solutions and visual challenges
The Design School                                                             The students worked in groups and were asked to select and scope
The Oslo School of Architecture and Design, Institute for Design, is          their new service designs and were invited to make use of the project’s
a partner in the project and lead the service innovation and research         research to date. When working on the project they learned to draw
design. One year into InnArbeid, AHO created an elective Master               upon advanced research whilst they were able to take risk beyond
course module to run alongside the project independently, where               perhaps what a research group would had the time or nerve to - in
master service design students were invited to work with our research-        particular with such fundamental social issues at stake.
based design brief to produce future service design concepts. This
took place over half a semester – eight weeks. The design brief was to        The work resulted in two distinct directions – towards systemic changes
develop service design concepts the enable and ensure the transition          and towards user-empowerment solutions. An example of the former
from school to working life. Their challenge was that there is a lack         was the concept ‘On Track’. Here the students suggest a re-organised
of knowledge concerning people with disabilities, where especially            flow of the work training and employment to ensure continuous
inclusion in working life has received little attention (NOU, 2016) yet       development and engagement (Figure 3). The students took on board
it known that participation in working life is known to give positive         a complex and explicitly wicked problem –- ensuring that young people
                                                                              with ID do not end up in their first positon after school. This could be the
                                                                              day centre, at home or at a work training centre, but that they develop in
172                                                                                                                                                                   173
their post-school life. Their project reflected a thorough understanding                        and discursive aspects of design and how these may feed innovation
of the current state of needs, services, roles and institutions. They did                       research. Design research has a role to play to ensure that the practical
take an art school flight of imagination – yet firmly grounded in research                      relevance is explored within a practical ‘makers’ frame – reshaped
– and by embracing the freedoms this offered suggested a bold and                               through co-evolution. Through such investigations, one may seek
innovative set of services for changing the transition from school to                           assurance that the problem framing can potentially lead to realistic and
apprenticeship to work for young people with Intellectual disabilities.                         relevant solutions (Dorst, 2015). The final presentation was to a senior
They re-adressed the roles played by the different institutions in order                        service designer at a leading Norwegian design consultancy, several of
to stagger the road to employment – a radical move, yet also one that                           the partners in InnArbeid and the AHO researchers.
makes ‘sense’ if one were to enable change from a user perspective and
with a service delivery in mind.                                                                And in the making processes of our service design concepts, there are
                                                                                                also insights appearing that may only be apparent or come about only
                                                                             Figure 3.
                                                                             The resulting      during the creative process. These may in turn be pivotal in the work of
                                                                             concept ‘On        implementation and transferability, and as such are crucial for innovation
                                                                             Track’ pro-        projects. Such an emergent approach in design practice to the problem
                                                                             posed a new        framing has also been described as non-linear, and explorative (Van
                                                                             ‘track’ for the    der Bijl-Brouwer, 2019). This ‘reframes the task of design as system
                                                                             person with        transformation, rather than the creation of a solution’ (Dorst, 2019: 117)
                                                                             ID whereby
                                                                             the daycentre/
                                                                             activity           The Workshop Design
                                                                             centre was         The InnArbeid ideation and concept stage is led by AHO and it followed
                                                                             positioned         on from the user insight work led by Sogndalen municipality. At this
                                                                             as a place of      stage, we’d gained some early insights; an interdisciplinary perspective
                                                                             transit and        and a conformation that close cooperation with the public sector is
                                                                             furthered          important (e.g. Jacobs 2016). Furthermore, a flexible and pragmatic
                                                                             training           approach to data collection is crucial for obtaining relevant knowledge
Advanced service co-design requires knowledge transfer and                   towards an
                                                                                                from all involved actors (Holen-Rabbesvik et al, forthcoming).
                                                                             assisted work-
negotiation of the contextual frame for the design projects, as the
                                                                             ing position
participants need to understand, decide, and cooperate on acting             and towards        We designed a series of co-design workshops to explore what design
forward. Therefore, alongside the service concept development, the           traditional        intervention may support systemic coordination and mapping of work
students were set challenges such as visualising central user insights –     employment.        ability. We ensured a broad involvement across professions and with
which is quite a challenge with these hard-to-reach users (Figure 4). The                       the various roles that relate to our end-user in the workshops: from
student’ design process explored how we may visually present these                              the municipality, department of employment (NAV), upper secondary
users’ ‘voice’ that is ‘information about a particular user’s preferences                       school, assisted living carers, to work training employers, to employers
and perspectives’ (Langergaard, 2011: 227). The resulting visualisations                        and colleagues. The rational for this broad involvement was an
aided an understanding on the perception of people with ID.                                     increased understanding that services are not only an end product in
                                                                                                themselves, but that services increasingly become a driving force for
                                                                             Figure 4.
                                                                                                broader societal changes (Sangiorgi, 2011). The first set of workshops
                                                                             Shivani
                                                                             Prakash using      focused on participation for idea generation and the second set for
                                                                             graphic marks      concept design developments.
                                                                             illustrating
                                                                             insights, whilst   Ideation workshops
                                                                             untangling the     To start of the idea workshops, a design researcher presented the project
                                                                             visual issue       through a narrative visualized by way of a user journeys (Figure 5). Upon
                                                                             of avoiding
                                                                                                entering the workshop, each participant could place themselves on the
                                                                             identifying the
Making do                                                                    people with        journey.
When explorative design processes are teamed with co-creation and            ID whilst also
user-involvement, we have an activity that is a ‘working with’ rather        working on
than a ‘doing to’ (Ingold, 2011; Sanders & Stappers 2011). I mention         avoiding the
the design school’s involvement to make a case for the experimental          stigmatizing
                                                                             clichés of ID.
174                                                                                                                                                                          175
                                                                           Figure 5.             researchers involved in the project. This formed a feedback loop and
                                                                           The timeline          quality insurance whilst also prompting further feedback on new ideas
                                                                           and scope             and new user insights. The emergent problem framing was thus keep
                                                                           for people
                                                                                                 firmly within an innovation frame, where each involvement with the
                                                                           with ID in the
                                                                           InnArbeid..           users afforded reframing – beyond merely conforming what we knew
                                                                                                 thus far.
                                                                           Figure 6.
                                                                           The complex           Concept workshops
                                                                           sets of actors
                                                                                                 From the ideation workshops, we chose to develop three concepts: a
                                                                           mapped out.
                                                                                                 visual CV; a digital meeting place between employers and a digital ‘market
                                                                           Figure 7. Each        place’ to connect potential workers and employers. These concepts
                                                                           task had a            came out of a combination of ideas generated in the ideas workshop
                                                                           question card         and were presented as incomplete (Figure 9) as incompleteness has a
                                                                           with reference        generative force in triggering new ideas, attracting contributors and
                                                                           material.             adapting to changing environments. However, there is also a challenge
                                                                                                 in establishing enough rules to provide stability, without stifling the
The workshop material and activities were shaped in order to leverage                            design (Garud, Jain & Tuertscher 2009).
the expertise of the different actors, by using questions informed by                                                                                                         Figure 9. Ear-
the user insights thus far infused with current research and framed                                                                                                           ly concepts
within the project goal of innovating technology-supported services                                                                                                           sketches
(Figures 5 to 7). We also invited young people with ID themselves as                                                                                                          presented as
                                                                                                                                                                              incomplete
well as parents of people with ID. Whilst the workshop was designed                                                                                                           designs.
to include – we confirmed ahead that questions were relatable and we
used visualisations actively – we also knew that the young people with
ID would have limited opportunity to contribute in such a setting. We
therefore also had smaller, individual meetings where the work could be
more on the terms of the person with ID.

These activities gave us an opportunity to confirm or contest the
collected narratives and insights as a way of ensuring robustness in our                         Engaging with the great variety of users at every stage in the innovation
new insights and current challenges. However, as this is an innovation                           project opens up a space for thinking and exploring through doing
project, the focus went beyond this and the activities were designed                             – not relying only on cognitive reasoning. Such an involvement,
to leverage the participants’ ideas for future technology-supported                              whereby the actors are not just sources of information on the outset
services and the implications for the networks each actor presented.                             but active participants throughout as in co-creation and evaluation, we
The discussions allowed for an untangling of why something was                                   acknowledge that the stakeholders constitute the system and that any
chosen or why it was important to an actor or set of actors.                                     change will be tethered to or depend on the involved stakeholders
The transcribed material from these workshops was analysed by                                    (Jones, 2014). From the ideas workshop, we developed a CV probe
inductive thematic analysis (Braun & Clarke, 2006). The emergent                                 (Figure 10 & 11) towards the concept workshops in order to further
themes were summarized and presented back to participants in                                     develop a conversation on possible designs and directions (Boehner,
the next concept workshop, as well as to project partners and other                              Gaver & Boucher, 2012).
                                                                            Figure 8. Four
                                                                                                 During the workshop, sketches or visualizations of different concept
                                                                            workshops were
                                                                            conducted each       solutions were shown to the participants who was asked to further
                                                                            engaging 12-14       explore and critically discuss these concept designs. The visual
                                                                            participants, of     concepts worked as a kind of experience prototyping: “any kind of
                                                                            which several par-   representation, in any medium, that is designed to understand, explore
                                                                            ticipating twice.    or communicate what it might be like to engage with the product,
                                                                                                 space or system we are designing” (Buchenau & Suri, 2000, p. 425).
                                                                                                 The participating young people with ID had either a parent or a carer

176                                                                                                                                                                                     177
with them to ensure that they could participate as much as possible of                       The Research Group
the workshop and also to inform facilitators ahead in creating a safe and                    For this paper, we have focused on the design research interventions
inclusive experience.                                                                        and methods rather than on our results and the paper highlights the
                                                                                             research entanglements of using design for future service innovation
                                                                            Figure 10. The   processes by way of engaging with and for people with reduced
                                                                            CV probe was
                                                                                             cognitive abilities.
                                                                            worked on
                                                                            by individual
                                                                            members in       Collaboration dialectic
                                                                            the workshop,    The project’s trans-disciplinary group found a way to work together
                                                                            and was also     during our pre-project and during the application process we agreed
                                                                            discussed        on participation across work packages. The application procedure
                                                                            in a group       however demanded a certain division of labour. When we successfully
                                                                            at school
                                                                                             gained funding, we realised we would need certain set times to working
                                                                            prior to the
                                                                            workshop         things out together and planned more frequent two day meetings.
                                                                            participation    This set-up was in keeping with a holistic approach to innovation:
                                                                            – led by a       research shows that a holistic understanding of problems - and in turn,
These workshops show how design researchers’ may make tactical              teacher.         of the underlying user needs - is necessary to bring about innovation
forays into exploring a complex and difficult situation, which in turn                       in contexts where the problems are complex, dynamic and linked to
generate knowledge towards the next technical development stage.            Figure 11.       networks (Thies, 2015). The lack of knowledge base is particularly
However, the main challenge at this stage in the innovation process was     Annotated        challenged when it comes to identifying needs in complex contexts
not only to identify solution spaces but rather to co-creatively decide     probe.
                                                                                             that require inter-organizational cooperation such as for InnArbeid, and
on a problem framing. With such a complex social issue - we do not                           when end-users have various degrees of cognitive impairment.
lack problems to solve – neither singular nor systemic ones. As a recent
study shows, the problem framing in the social sector tends to be non-                       In order to support our emergent problem formulation (Van der Bijl-
linear, emergent and explorative (Van der Bijl-Brouwer, 2019).                               Brouwer, 2019) we strove to combine academic rigour with practical
                                                                                             relevance through engagement. AHO also initiated and engaged an
                                                                            Figure 12.
                                                                                             eclectic mix of researchers and designers to be a disruptive group
                                                                            screenshot of
                                                                            an experien-     (e.g. ‘forstyrrergruppe’) to ensure the project group was not tripped up
                                                                            tial prototype   by their own good intentions or their own learned practices entering
                                                                            of the CV        new fields. Importantly a ‘forstyrrergruppe’ is not tasked with solving
                                                                            explored in      anything – they are free to give critical feedback without repercussions of
                                                                            a workshop       an increased workload as a consequence of any critique or corrections.
                                                                            through visual
                                                                            components.
                                                                                             Collaboration as a shared balancing act
                                                                                             By ensuring this extended, shared time, we created a productive
The analysis of the concept work embraced this complexity and leaned                         space which has given us joint publications, a national conference and
on process studies that sees change and innovation as ongoing, instead                       exhibitions well as the innovation concepts thus far. We propose that out
of a linear approach consisting of phases, and focus on ‘how and why                         of this space grew a dialog that can be seen as a frame through which
things emerge, develop, grow, or terminate over time’ (Langley et                            views and perspectives forged from differing discursive paradigms,
al., 2013, p. I). Process studies are stories about change; patterns in                      disciplinary trainings and personal histories that were brought into an
events, activities and choices over time; who did what when (Langley,                        improvisational activity of critical co-production. These voices speak
1999) and the participation and engagement were designed to tease                            from particular positions within design, computer science, municipal
out the relevant practices for our project’s overarching aim to ‘design a                    work, health care studies and interaction design, information systems
new service model for the transition between upper secondary school                          and ethical studies. We also knew that we had to work with a hard-to-
and working life for people with ID’. However, the positivistic ethos of                     reach expertise from our end-users – young people with ID - and find
co-creation (Manzini, 2015) is pushed to its limits when working with                        ways to involve and engage them. Therefore, many kinds of expertise
people with ID and we had a focus on performativity and practices,                           were necessary towards our contribution in an academically funded
approaching practices as the unit of exploration, where knowledge is                         innovation project and we negotiated the lines between pragmatics
embedded and expressed in the doing – in the practice itself.                                and possibilities, from politics to propositions.

178                                                                                                                                                                        179
Design Research For Innovation                                               presentation of proposed functionality, they can ‘encourage engineers
Next we discuss the potential for design to contribute and enact and         and researchers to focus their attention, not only on the science of
enable change and challenge society by way of some tactical designerly       prospective inventions, but also their design’ (Heidingsfelder, Kimpel
and scholarly forays together with other knowledge domains.                  & Schraudner, 2017: 48).

As mentioned, the research project group created a dialectic space to        Innovation projects such as InnArbeid is also an opportunity for design to
develop an emergent problem framing together, as opposed to the              evolve, not just contribute to other fields. It allows for a contextualization
more distributed (and perhaps more time efficient) way of delegating         of design practice or a self-reflection. As Margolin has previous argued:
separate sections – a typical approach to such wicked problems (Jacobs,      ‘if designers are going to realize the full potential of design thought,
2006). As a group, we have created a conference, produced joint              then they should also learn to analyse how the situation that frame
publications, workshops and by now early concept innovations. Design         design practice are themselves constructed’ (2002: 241). For InnArbeid
research infused with informed freedom presents as an interesting            the involvement of design research meant we collaborated in visual and
idea generator for innovation. The robustness as well as the emergent        in part experimental ways. This contributed to a holistic approach to a
solution space was held in place through the wide user involvement –         complex and necessarily incomplete innovation environment. InnArbeid
from the practice field to the trans-disciplinary research group to the      is the only Norwegian research project to approach the entire timeline
disruptive expert group.                                                     from school to finding work as well as starting and remaining in work.
                                                                             The trans-disciplinarity of the research group is part of ensuring a wide
Here, design as a practice and an approach could contribute by               engagement and actual user involvement with the complex transition
creating, conceptualising and enabling innovations in particular ‘where      that people with ID find themselves in when going from school to work.
the conceptual thinking depends on the craft skills’ (Frayling, 2015).
The new Horizon 2020 program - Horizon Europe - asks for just such           By involving all actors by partnering them into the project and inviting
an approach: more innovation, industry collaboration and tackling            young people with ID and their parents and carers ensured that we
of complex problems such as climate change and health. Design’s              had many iterations and alterations on the development of ideas as
expertise has a close fit to such innovation work in making ‘unthinkable     much as concepts. And by applying for and designing ways in which
discoveries’ , in other words to not only rely on cognitive current          the user engagement and feedback may involve alternative ways of
knowledge, but on the actionable knowledge – the practices - of the          communicating – whether through a trusted advocate such as parent or
expert users. However, design’s participation in a research group require    experienced carer or through using visuals and video to communicate
a certain set up - it asks for an iterative process, whereby insights and    concepts e.g. experiential prototypes.
needs have to be revisited and revised because of the complexity
involved in proposing change into an interdependent system (Jones,           With our design research participation, we suggested some tactical
2014).                                                                       designerly and scholarly forays into the knowledge domains of adjacent
                                                                             fields, such as education, care, work training and work assessment. In
Dialectic spaces                                                             turn, research has pointed to that ‘research through design is likely to
Our planning led to long meetings where we moved forward at a                produce theories that are provisional, contingent, and aspirational’
slow pace, yet it was crucial to be exposed to the same material and         (Gaver 2012: 937). There is a tension in the propositional nature
respond to it from our own individual practices. Design can play a role      of design, with that of a deductive, rational progression towards
in rigorous research through informed yet experimental forays into           innovations as well as the diverse insights from such hard-to-reach
new solution spaces (Wood, 2012). Research has shown that people             people. Research suggest that such a long view of development via
from different fields not only work with their specialist languages, but     communities of practice helps to “focus energy and intention to build a
‘they are actually trying to achieve different things’. (Blackwell et al.,   body of design knowledge that may take design into a desired future”
2009: 4). Working with and through methods of design that encourage          (Poggenpohl, 2015: 44). As such the innovation project InnArbeid
experimentation, can help researchers and developers ‘uncover the            highlights design research as less of a technical, improving activity than
virtually unlimited inherent contingencies of the world and gain new         that of a cultural and performative endeavour.
insights, both within and across their particular disciplines’ (Grand and
Wiedmer, 2010: 5–6). In this sense, design is a cultural endavour and
the cultural semantics aspect of this is under researched (Frayling 2015).
Methods of design can help transcend the limitations of dominant
terminologies or methodologies and aid a transformation of diverse
perspectives into shared visions. By presenting a visual or tangible

180                                                                                                                                                           181
References                                                                                    Jacobs, K. (2016). Theorising Interdisciplinary Public Sector Accounting Research.
                                                                                              Financial Accountability & Management, 32(4), 469-488.
Barry, A., Born, G. & Weszkalnys, G. (2008) Logics of interdisciplinarity, Economy and        Jones, P. H. (2014). Systemic Design Principles for Complex Social Systems. In Social
Society, 37(1), 20-49.                                                                        Systems and Design (pp. 91–128). Springer, Tokyo.
Boehner, K., Gaver, W., & Boucher, A. (2012). Probes. In Inventive Methods. C. Lury & N.      KS,    Direktoratet   for  e-helse     &    Helsedirektoratet.     (2019).   Nasjonalt
Wakeford( eds.) (pp. 199-215). Routledge.                                                     velferdsteknologiprogram. Available at: https://helsedirektoratet.no/velferdsteknologi
                                                                                              [Accessed 5 May 2019].
Blackwell, A. F., Wilson, L., Boulton, C., & Knell, J. (2009). Radical innovation: crossing
knowledge boundaries with interdisciplinary teams (No. UCAM-CL-TR-760). University            Langergaard, L. L. (2011). Understandings of ‘users’ and ‘innovation’ in a public
of Cambridge, Computer Laboratory.                                                            sector context. In J. Sundbo & M. Toivonen (eds.), Userbased Innovation in Services.
                                                                                              Cheltenham, England: Edward Elgar Publishing.
Buchenau, M., & Suri, J. F. (2000). Experience prototyping. In Proceedings of the 3rd
conference on Designing Interactive Systems: processes, practices, methods, and               Langley, A. (1999). Strategies for theorizing from process data. Academy of Management
techniques (pp. 424-433). ACM.                                                                review, 24(4), 691-710.
Braun, V., & Clarke, V. (2006). Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qualitative Research   Langley, A., Smallman, C., Tsoukas, H., & Van de Ven, A.H. (2013). Process studies of
in Psychology, 3(2), 77-101.                                                                  change in organization and management: Unveiling temporality, activity, and flow.
                                                                                              Academy of Management Journal, 56(1), 1-13.
Dorst, K. (2015). Frame innovation: Create new thinking by design. MIT Press.
                                                                                              Manzini, E. (2015). Design, when everybody designs: An introduction to design for
Dorst, K. (2019). Design beyond Design, She Ji: The Journal of Design, Economics, and
                                                                                              social innovation. MIT press.
Innovation 5(2),117-127.
                                                                                              Margolin, V. (2002). The politics of the artificial: Essays on design and design studies.
Engeland, J. og Langballe, E., M. (2017) Voksne og eldre med utviklingshemming
                                                                                              University of Chicago press.
og dagens bruk av samarbeidsfora i kommunene. available at: https://s3.eu-west-1.
amazonaws.com/ah-web-prod/documents/nav_-_utviklingshemning_og_bruk_av_                       Murray, E., Burns, J., May, C., Finch, T., O’Donnell, C., Wallace, P., & Mair, F. (2011).
samarbeidsfora.pdf [Accessed 5 May 2019].                                                     Why is it difficult to implement e-health initiatives? A qualitative study. Implementation
                                                                                              Science, 6(1), 6
Engström, J., & Elg, M. (2015). A self-determination theory perspective on customer
participation in service development. Journal of Services Marketing, 29(6/7), 511-521.        NHO, KS & Difi. (2019). Leverandørutviklingsprogrammet. Available at: http://
                                                                                              innovativeanskaffelser.no/ [Accessed 5 May 2019].
Frayling, C. (2015). RTD 2015 Provocation by Sir Christopher Frayling Part 5: RTD
Proceedings. Available at: https://vimeo.com/129779638 [Accessed 5 May 2019].                 Norges Forskningsråd. (2019). Gode og effektive helse-, omsorgs- og velferdstjenester
                                                                                              (HELSEVEL).    Available    at:   https://www.forskningsradet.no/prognett-helsevel/
Garud, R., Jain, S., & Tuertscher, P. (2008). Incomplete by design and designing for
                                                                                              Forside/1254005461857 [Accessed 5 May 2019].
incompleteness, Organization studies, 29(3), 351-371.
                                                                                              NOU 2016:17. (2016). På lik linje. Åtte løft for å realisere grunnleggende
Gaver, W. (2012). What should we expect from research through design? Proceedings
                                                                                              rettigheter for personer med utviklingshemming. Available at: https://www.
of the 2012 ACM annual conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, Austin,
                                                                                              regjeringen.no/contentassets/b0baf226586543ada7c530b4482678b8/no/pdfs
Texas, USA, pp. 937-946.
                                                                                              nou201620160017000dddpdfs.pdf [Accessed 5 May 2019].
Hansen, L. A., Kistorp, K. M. & Almqvist, F. (2016). Veikart for tjenesteinnovasjon:
                                                                                              Poggenpohl, S. H. (2015). Communities of Practice in Design Research. She Ji: The
Følgeforskning på effekten av tjenesteinnovasjon for Nasjonalt velferdsteknologiprogram.
                                                                                              Journal of Design, Economics, and Innovation, 1(1), 44-57.
[online] Oslo: The Norwegian Directorate of eHealth, pp. 27. Available at: https://ehelse.
no/Documents/Velferdsteknologi/Veikart%20for%20tjenesteinnovasjon_rapport_pdf.                Sanders, E. B. N., & Stappers, P. J. (2008). Co-creation and the new landscapes of
pdf [Accessed 5 May 2019].                                                                    design. Co-design, 4(1), 5-18.
Heidingsfelder, M., Kimpel, K., Best, K. and Schraudner, M. (2015), “Shaping Future           Sangiorgi, D. (2011). Transformative services and transformation design. International
— Adapting design know-how to reorient innovation towards public preferences”,                Journal of Design, 5(2).
Technological Forecasting and Social Change, No. 101, 291–298.
                                                                                              Sein, M., Henfridsson, O., Purao, S., Rossi, M. and Lindgren, R. (2011). Action design
Helsedirektoratet. (2019) Omsorgsplan 2020 – Innføring av velferdsteknologiske                research. MIS Quarterly, 35(1), 37-56.
løsninger. Available at: https://helsedirektoratet.no/tilskudd/omsorgsplan-2020-
                                                                                              Thies, A. (2015). On the Value of Design Thinking for Innovation in Complex Contexts:
innforing-av-velferdsteknologiske-losninger [Accessed 5 May 2019].
                                                                                              A Case from Healthcare. Interaction Design and Architecture(s) Journal – IxD&A, 27,
Helse- og omsorgsdepartementet. (2013) Morgendagens omsorg (Meld. St. 29 (2012-               159−171.
2013)). Oslo: Helse- og omsorgsdepartementet.
                                                                                              van der Bijl-Brouwer, M. (2019). Problem framing expertise in public and social
Holen-Rabbersvik, E. et al (forthcoming)                                                      innovation. She Ji: The Journal of Design, Economics, and Innovation, 5(1), 29-43.
ICD-10: The international statistical classification of diseases and related health           Wood, J. (2012). In the Cultivation of Research Excellence, is Rigour a No฀Brainer?.
problems: systematic part, alphabetical index (simplified). 10th revision Norwegian           Journal of Writing in Creative Practice 5(1), 11-26.
ed. [Den internasjonale statistiske klassifikasjon av sykdommer og beslektede
                                                                                              ‘‘Work inclusion for people with intellectual disabilities’ Conference at University of
helseproblemer: Systematisk del, alfabetisk indeks (forenklet) 10. revisjon, norsk utg]
                                                                                              Agder, 22nd–23rd May, 2019: https://innarbeid.uia.no/konferanse-universitetet-agder-
Oslo: Helsedirektoratet.
                                                                                              arbeidsinkludering-personer-utviklingshemming/ respectively.
Ingold, Tim (ed.) (2011). Redrawing anthropology: materials, movements, lines.
                                                                                              https://ec.europa.eu/info/node/71880
Farnham: Ashgate.
                                                                                              http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_IP-19-1676_en.htm


182                                                                                                                                                                                        183
       The digitisation of
      cordillera weaving:
        Designing a new
            oral tradition
                     Rachel Kelly
184                            185
Abtsract                                                                                                                                                 Figures 1
Under the remit of the UN Global Challenges Sustainable Goal 4, it                                                                                       & 2. Nesta
                                                                                                                                                         Problem
must be understood that the capital value of knowledge preservation
                                                                                                                                                         Definition
needs to be elevated by the economic benefits of formal education                                                                                        & Theory of
and the ongoing and often lifelong socio-economic impact it creates.                                                                                     Change plans
The development and support of ethnolinguistic weaving practice                                                                                          devised by
may enable real-world benefits for Philippine society, culture, the                                                                                      Kelly, 2018
environment and the economy; it may address global challenges of
diminishing craft skill bases and knowledge and it may encourage an
education ecosystem which challenges dominant craft and design
education structures…

It has been evidenced that while the Cordilleran weaving tradition has
the status of National Heritage within the Philippines, the numbers of
community weavers able to practice is dwindling. A 2019 British Council
& Crafts Council / Crafting Futures grant project enabled a collaboration
between the Philippines based CordiTex project and Manchester School
of Art to support the future digitization of indigenous weaving tradition
within the Cordillera region of the Northern Philippines entitled:
Creating a Sustainable Textile Future for Women via the Digitization of
Cordillera Weaving Tradition (CSTFW) project. This project developed
a Learning Framework and Toolkit to support the preservation of an
oral based weaving tradition and to develop interventions for practice
and knowledge based change. The project raises the voice of oral craft
traditions and presents a heteroglossia, defined by Mikhail Bhaktin
(1895 – 1975) to describe the relationships between different voices
which can be heard within authored works such as hand woven textiles.
The CSTFW project is considering the structures and systems from an
educational and social standpoint to understand the perspectives for
change this project identifies. Our rationale was to listen, observe and
consider the research context and its challenges, in order to be able to
respond with effective and useful strategies for support. We asked if
the weaving tradition of the Cordillera is to transform and change from
the problems it faces, what impact might the shift from of an oral to a
digital tradition create?

We became a part of the CordiTex project in their second year out of
three years funding and we brought Crafting Futures based research          cultural, functional, and which represents the artistry of ethnolinguistic
questions from our project funders. The British Council Crafting Futures    communities in the northern Luzon geographic region. The major
project asks, How can craft generate economic opportunities and             groups in the region include the Ifugao, Kalinga, Tinguian, Kankana-
enhance livelihoods for women? and, how can the global craft sector         ey, Apayao and Ibaloy, each presenting unique histories, rituals,
address the declining youth engagement in the practice as well as           language and weaving styles. The weaving techniques across the
the growing intergenerational divide? These questions sit beyond the        whole Cordillera region and communities is represented by a weaving
CordiTex project aims and part of our work in the collaboration, has        design process and culture which is underpinned by distinct religious,
been to consolidate our differing research destinations and aims.           socio-political and mathematical values. The process of weaving is
                                                                            often taught from grandparent to grandchild and features a meditative
Research Context                                                            process of counting from memory which weavers learn from a young
In the Cordillera region a rich tradition of weaving can be traced back     age. The uptake of weaving amongst younger women today and the
through time for centuries. Cordillera weaving occupies a niche, that is    knowledge of weaving techniques, pattern structures and traditions

186                                                                                                                                                              187
are diminishing due to a range of socio-political and economic factors.    2011). A Theory of Change model (Nesta 2018) was the backbone of our
Weaving knowledge is not held in a written form but is passed on           methodology and we utilised our model to inform the project research
via an oral tradition, where the holders of this knowledge are mainly      questions, aims and outcomes. The Theory of Change framework was
elderly women ‘Master Weavers’. The impact of the oral tradition as        key to embedding a consideration of the wider landscape of change in
an unwritten knowledge base for Cordillera weaving is now in a critical    which this project is located.
state and the weaving tradition may become extinct.
                                                                           Research Part 1: Field visits to five Cordilleran weaving
      “The focus of the CordiTex research was conducted among              communities in Kiangen, Abra, Manabo, Santiago and Mindoro
      the Tinguian of Abra in northern Luzon, who had scarce               While the CordiTex project is looking to preserve the Cordillera
      documentation of its weaving tradition, but revealed the most        weaving tradition, our research focused upon two communities who
      intricate designs based on the collections from the museums          are considered in most critical need of support due to the near decline
      in the US. The weaving declined in the 1980s, and only one           of their tradition. The communities from the Abra delta area near to
      Tinguian community in Manabo, Abra is still weaving, and             Llocos Sur and the South China Sea are described as having Ibaloy and
      natural dyeing is revived in Penarubia, Abra. Most of the            Tinguian heritage (Tolentino 2018). Both groups weave textiles such as
      master weavers are elders and many who passed away without           the Binakul which was a cloth originally used to call upon the wind gods
      transmitting knowledge to the younger generation” (Salvador-         to warn off dangerous spirits.
      Amores 2018).
                                                                                                                                                              Figure 3:
                                                                                                                                                              Binakul
Project Approach                                                                                                                                              Fabric. Credit
The groups of weavers from the Cordillera are identified by their                                                                                             CordiTex
ethnolinguistic languages which define their cultures and represent                                                                                           Archive
identities specific to place, ritual, beliefs and work. The Cordillera
ethnolinguistic groups were traditionally “a society made up of
small, dispersed, rivalrous groups, with a reputation for wildness (e.g.
headhunting)” (Rosaldo 1980). The difference between the knowledge
systems, culture, and material knowledge held within the Cordillera
communities and the knowledge we hold as research practitioners is
distinct. The value of the weaving community languages and voices is
a richness we as western contemporary educators find hard to improve
upon.

In terms of approaching data collection we employed phenomenological
and ethnographic methods including field research and deep hanging
out (Geertz 1998). Such approaches meant that we were located in the
research context where we could listen, looked, feel and remember
rather than walk around with a notebook or camera. We were fortunate
to have a photographer with us during our first field visit (Arnold        Groups such as those who live in Manabo & Illocos are geographically
Salvador-Amores) and his photographs tell a visual story of the project.   dispersed communities of Tinguian heritage having had to move due
Amores captured what we couldn’t always see and our reflections on         to deforestation and problems faced as a result of environmental
the data he collected via the photographs have supported us to figure      problems developing in rice growing (Gabattiss 2018; Glover & Stone
the range of practitioner identities and voices we encountered (Holland;   2018). The groups have an identity which is demonstrated by their
Lachicotte; Skinner & Cain 1998)                                           ethnolinguistic language and the representations of their language by
                                                                           their textiles. If their textiles disappear, a large part of their identity will
This project held a mirror up to us as researchers, educators and women    also be diminished.
and we the project team of Rachel Kelly and Dr Michelle Stephens
maintained an identity as textile practitioners and weavers rather than    The Manabo community from the Abra Delta
researcher outsiders (Walmsley 2018). A Design Thinking Cycle was          The Manabo community has a status and history that places it in a
employed post-field visit, as an evaluation methodology to move the        superior position in the hierarchy of weaver communities and culture
research from understanding to exploration and materialization (Cross      in the Cordillera, due to the complex weaving patterns and fine

188                                                                                                                                                                     189
cotton yarns used. Paradoxically, it is now in the position of being the                                                                                              Figure 5.
community most at risk from the weaving tradition dying out and they                                                                                                  Manabo
cite many reasons, but the inaccessibility of Philippine yarns which are                                                                                              Community
                                                                                                                                                                      Weavers.
sold for export before they are even planted is making it too costly
                                                                                                                                                                      Credit
for them to weave. There is activism within the Philippines seeking                                                                                                   Amores 2019
to remedy the inaccessibility of Philippine Cotton and the UNESCO
heritage status of the rice terraces is going some way to support the
preservation of Philippine cotton growing (Glover & Stone 2018).

Manabo is a new village still under construction, mainly consisting of
breeze-block houses with foot weaving looms housed in a garage.
From what we were told, the village had moved to this new location
from their traditional area due to a change to growing tapioca rather
than rice.
                                                                                             A shift in the tone of the visit came when researcher Stephens
The Manabo women weavers we met were all united in their view as                             showed examples of her digital weaving work to the community on
to why weaving was declining in their community, via specifically, the                       her mobile phone. The group became mesmerised by the images
lack of interest in young women to become weavers. The decline in                            and the conversation opened up. The Manabo weavers, in a sense
                                                                            Figure 4                                                                                  Figure 6. Dr
                                                                            Manabo Vil-                                                                               Michelle Ste-
                                                                            lage Garage                                                                               phens mobile
                                                                            which houses                                                                              Phone. Credit
                                                                            last remaining                                                                            Amores 2019
                                                                            community
                                                                            looms. Credit
                                                                            Amores 2019




                                                                                             decided to listen to us because they were interested in talking about
weaving take up means that the end of weaving in the community                               weaving rather than talking about the problems in their community.
will come when the older Master Weavers we met, die. Our project                             The exchange with the phone opened up a creative space where we
partner had arranged during our visit to collect a loom belonging to the                     were able to introduce our project and to demonstrate hand and digital
community to take back to the Museum Kordillera due to lack of space                         weave drafting methods. Explaining that they could write down their
in the garage space and because it was unlikely ever to be used again.                       designs and that they could be developed in many ways as a result.

There was a sense of despair that the young of the community were                            Drafting is the notational language required for the translation of
either not prepared nor interested in learning to weave. With this group                     woven fabric into a binary design code which will enable weaving to be
in particular, the potential of weaving as a good source of income could                     developed, patterns to be preserved and for the draft to be used as a
be developed and our project had been designed with this type of                             teaching tool.
community in mind. Our rationale as researchers was to is scrutinise
what we saw and understood to be true, and we have been mindful not
to over romanticise the problem, but to seek via our evidence if positive
outcomes for the preservation of the weaving tradition may emerge.

190                                                                                                                                                                            191
                                                                              Figure 7.        structures, so is a design process. The binary language of drafting is
                                                                              Manabo           universal and this first writing of a draft was the first step away from the
                                                                              Community        oral tradition. For these women it was the first time they had written
                                                                              Weavers look
                                                                                               their designs down.
                                                                              at mobile
                                                                              phone weav-
                                                                              ing images.      It is implied by the oral tradition that the draft process creates a boundary
                                                                              Credit Amores    object with which to mediate between the tradition and the present
                                                                              2019)            (Star & Griesemer 1989). The drafting process in this context became
                                                                                               a mediating practice and the workshop which took place in the small
                                                                                               garage space captured a sense of future potential which the Learning
                                                                                               Tool Kit will hopefully enable within contexts such as the Manabo.

                                                                                               The concerns of the weavers are the lack of young people prepared or
                                                                                               interested to take up weaving. There was a sense of despair that this
                                                                                               is the situation. With this group in particular, the potential of weaving
                                                                              Figure 8.        to be a good source of income needs to be communicated better to
                                                                              Manabo           the non-weaving community members and there was a sense that the
                                                                              Community
                                                                              Weavers learn                                                                                    Figure 9.
                                                                              to draft their                                                                                   Manabo
                                                                              weaving.                                                                                         Community
                                                                              Credit Amores                                                                                    Weavers
                                                                              2019                                                                                             working
                                                                                                                                                                               at outside
                                                                                                                                                                               table. Credit
                                                                                                                                                                               Amores 2019




      “…draft notation uses graph paper as a framework. The space
      between its evenly spaced verticals is understood to indicate the                        weaving might be a nuisance to other activities. The contrast between
      warp threads, that between the horizontals, spaced similarly and                         the lack of space in the garage with the ‘packed-in’ looms with the
      intersecting at right angles, the filling threads. The little squares                    freedom of space the impromptu workshop and draft process created
      thus formed denote the intersection of warp and weft… of                                 was startling. The workshop ended with the weavers, sat outside in the
      course more than the thread construction has to be identified in                         fresh air at an outdoor table with the women continuing to draft their
      the analysis of a cloth…when these facts have been established,                          patterns after the project team had left.
      all the information required for the reproduction of a cloth has
      been ascertained, for the procedure of weaving is merely a                               The Sabangan Weavers Association in Santiago Ilocos Sur
      matter of inference” (Albers, 2017: 22).                                                 The Sabangan Weavers Association comprises three elderly women
                                                                                               weavers and one granddaughter; Talin 85, Ibing 75 and Petra 79
The weavers saw the potential to enable the expression of their ideas                          and Shara 16. Within this visit we observed a rare apprentice pairing
via the drafting process and each weaver became fully engaged in what                          between grandmother Talin and granddaughter Shara, who practices
we were showing them. The Master Weaver worked with quick marks                                sections of weaving on her grandmothers loom. We were also exposed
and the other weavers worked slowly and precisely. The drafting process                        to the affect climate change is having upon these communities directly
became an expression of their signatures, just as they are the writers                         and in the home of Talin which is very close to the South China Sea wall,
of their cloth. What the oral tradition holds on to is the un-common                           she had lost sections of her roof in the December 2018 typhoons.
nuances of textile language manifested in work which is crafted and
made rather than designed. Drafting is the written notation of woven
192                                                                                                                                                                                      193
                                                                            Figure 9.                                                                                       Figure 11.
                                                                            Manabo Com-                                                                                     Master weav-
                                                                            munity Weav-                                                                                    er Mam Ta-
                                                                            ers working at                                                                                  lin’s typhoon
                                                                            outside table.                                                                                  damaged
                                                                            Credit Amores                                                                                   home.
                                                                            2019




                                                                            Figure 10.
                                                                            Master Weav-
                                                                            er Mam Talin.




This community will hopefully benefit from our project in particular, via
the development of the Learning Tool Kit, which will support apprentice
learners to work with more independence via the introduction of
portable weaving technology, access to a weavers network and
weave learning hub. In the research reflections we have made since
we undertook the first field visit, we have looked closer at the choices                     To contrast with the despairing situation we were presented with,
such women face in choosing weaving as a livelihood. We have used                            there were also high levels of actualizing/wellbeing (Maslow 1943)
a range of perspectives and methodologies to understand how the                              demonstrated by the elderly weavers in that they work independently,
development of a language-based understanding of their identity                              they are long living, active and they are Masters in their craft. The manner
(Gadamer 2006) might better support the weaving women to maintain                            in which weaving has been a central part of their family’s communities
strength in their choices. We heard many stories of women who were                           and the oral tradition which has enabled the weaving to be passed on
master weavers who gave up and now walk the highways selling eggs.                           is remarkable. Concerns for the Sabangan women are their very low
Shara, the apprentice Sabangan weaver was in school but has since                            income and their exposure to environmental dangers such as typhoons
January 2019 dropped out to look after her family.                                           and tsunamis, but wellbeing comes from their independence and

194                                                                                                                                                                                   195
autonomy and from the act (or ritual) of weaving rather than the income                  The process of translating the text into an opposite version of the
they generate.                                                                           truth, enables a version of the project which can be used to better
                                                                                         undertake a response to the research questions asked How can craft
                                                                            Figure 12.
                                                                            Apprentice                                                                                                    Figure 13.
                                                                            weaver.                                                                                                       Talin’s dry
                                                                                                                                                                                          garden
                                                                                                                                                                                          appeared like
                                                                                                                                                                                          a paradise in
                                                                                                                                                                                          contrast to
                                                                                                                                                                                          her typhoon
                                                                                                                                                                                          ravaged
                                                                                                                                                                                          home.




Being a weaver is the identity taken by these women and they
demonstrate this via:                                                                    generate economic opportunities and enhance livelihoods for women?
                                                                                         By opening up the picture of the context via a discourse analysis,
      • Their independence                                                               conceptual spaces are created around which to think, research and
      • Their work from home                                                             potentially to design interventions and tools which can support and
      • Pride via photographs of work in the home                                        enable the weavers to change their situation.
      • Participation in education projects
      • Family support structure and the connectiveness across                           Our visits to the communities enabled us to understand the context first
        generations                                                                      hand and exposed our biases, challenging us to seek a method to see
      • Direct selling, costing measuring and business capability                        different perspectives. Due to our research and practitioner led figuring
      • Peace at work – one weaver described her loom as ‘her office’
                                                                                         Concerns for the Sabangan women are their very low income. (The Sabangan women                   Figure 14.
The undertaking of the field visits such as the one to the Sabangan                      work independently and survive on what they earn from their weaving) Wellbeing comes             Discourse
community raises a concern that sympathetic researcher lenses can                        from the act or ritual of weaving rather than the income generated. (Weaving is an active        analysis
often be adopted when complex and challenging research experiences                       practice, it is physical, repetitive and time consuming). Being a weaver is the identity taken   undertaken
                                                                                         by these women and they demonstrated this via: (Weaving is one of a range of work types          as part of
are encountered. We experienced confusion as to how we were
                                                                                         available to these women, alternatives include egg selling, prostitution and factory work)
responding to these women and our responses were polarized between                                                                                                                        understand-
                                                                                         demonstrated via:
positive and negative.                                                                                                                                                                    ing research
                                                                                            •   Their independence; Their Dependence;                                                     process.
                                                                                            •   Their work from home; Their home is their place of work;
Discourse Analysis and in particular discourse analysis which uses                          •   Pride via photographs of work in the home. There are only pictures of their work;
a Foucauldian process of text reversal (Lee & Poynton 2000) can be                          •   Participation in education projects; It is useful for education projects to use
used as a method to help reveal an alternative to the sympathetic bias                          examples such as these women as data;
which can arise from projects such as ours. The visit to meet the elderly                   •   Family support structure and the connectiveness across generations; Ties that
Sabangan women living in extreme poverty could affect our bias and                              bind;
understanding. The results of a reversal analysis (see figure 14) using                     •   Direct selling; No one to support the sale of work;
a section of text highlighted above creates a picture which reveals an                   Peace at work – one weaver described her loom as ‘her office’. Life is so challenging in
alternative perspective of the structures which are implicated in the                    terms of poverty that the sanctuary of work brings a sense of relief.
enabling of such a despairing position for the Cordillera weavers.

196                                                                                                                                                                                                 197
(Holland; Lachicotte; Skinner & Cain 1998), we were able to adapt                                                                                                        Figure 16. A
and respond to the situations we were presented with. We started to                                                                                                      Lego loom
identify more deeply with the women and began to understand the                                                                                                          visualisation
                                                                                                                                                                         and reflection
wider implications for our research.
                                                                                                                                                                         on weaver
                                                                                                                                                                         concerns.
A Learning Tool Kit Development Workshop held at the                                                                                                                     Credit
University of the Philippines in Baguio                                                                                                                                  Amores Jan
The Learning Tool Kit Development Workshop in Baguio was attended                                                                                                        2019
by Thirty-Five participants from The Northern Cordillera villages,
academics and textile stakeholders. The methods used in preparing for
the workshop reflected a process designed to most effectively meet
the project aims and collect the data we required. A process for the
multi-lingual multi stakeholder workshop was sought which enabled
inclusive participation and a Lego© visualisation method (Lego© 2015;
Blair and Rillo 2016) was used. Using Lego© we asked simple questions
to generate meaningful qualitative data and the process replicated                         The oral tradition supports all of the Cordilleran communities by way of
somewhat how oral teaching and learning works by supporting                                the maintenance of their living culture. The practice of weaving has been
discourse to evolve and for the process to be captured via a shared                        an unstated support system for these communities and in particular the
group experience (Gauntlett 2011; Kelly 2017).                                             women within these communities, for such a long time that the value
                                                                                           of weaving to sustain and maintain livelihoods, most likely reaches far
      “…significant symbols – words for the most part but also                             beyond what is currently recognised.
      gestures, drawings, musical sounds, mechanical devices…
      anything that is disengaged from its mere actuality and used to                      Key reflections from weave Drafting workshop were:
      impose meaning upon experience” (Geertz 1973 p45 in Crotty
      1998 p53)                                                                               I.That weaving at home with the family and community is an
                                                                                              important part of the weaving experience for the women. They
We posed three simple questions:                                                              value the peace their practices bring.
      1. “Describe a place which is yours…                                                    II. The value of weaving as a source of income now that typhoons
      2. Tell us something only you know about Cordillera Weaving                             are occurring across all seasons is vital. The typhoons make work
         Tradition...                                                                         in the rice fields less dependable and more dangerous and
      3. What most concerns you about the preservation of Cordillera                          women can weave in all weathers so is seen as a positive aspect
         Weaving Tradition?”                                                                  for the maintenance of both community and livelihoods. Having
                                                                                              weaving resources which can support teaching and learning in
The community in the workshop revealed that they felt a pressure which                        the community, was seen as a positive idea.
is multi-layered where they are responsive to the range of voices from
their past, present and from their children looking towards the future.                       III. The autonomy of weaving as an identity, for the women was
                                                                          Figure 15. The      crucial, and while all the weavers we met were living below the
                                                                          Learning Tool       poverty line there were high actualizing outcomes for the women
                                                                          Kit Workshop        being able to work independently. NB: This is something which
                                                                          at University       our ongoing research is looking into in more depth.
                                                                          of Philippines
                                                                          in Baguio held
                                                                          19th January.
                                                                                           Participants as part of the Learning Tool Kit Workshop, were also taught
                                                                                           to draft their weaving via a stage by stage demonstration which used
                                                                                           old Cordilleran fabrics from the CordiTex archive during which, again
                                                                                           we learned that the community weavers are completely adept at
                                                                                           understanding weave drafting even though it was a first-time learning
                                                                                           experience for all. Participants expressed their revelations in the closing
                                                                                           workshop plenary at being taught a new weave language. Drafting is

198                                                                                                                                                                                199
the Threshold Concept (Meyer and Land 2003, 2005) required to enable                                                                                                       Figure 19.
digital weaving to take place, because it translates woven cloth into a                                                                                                    Workshop
binary language. By stepping through a knowledge portal during the                                                                                                         participants
                                                                                                                                                                           visit the
workshop, a seed for change was sown.
                                                                                                                                                                           CordiTex pro-
                                                                                                                                                                           ject archive
The final part of the Learning Toolkit workshop was a tour offered by                                                                                                      at Museum
the CordiTex team of their project archives at the Museum Kordillera.                                                                                                      Kordillera
While the weavers were amused at coming face to face with the work of                                                                                                      in Bagu-
their ancestors, there was a palpable sense of concern, or it could have                                                                                                   io. Credit
been awe, when the weavers viewed the carefully preserved fabrics.                                                                                                         Amores, Jan
The past and present collided at this moment and there was a huge                                                                                                          2019.
contrast between the circumstances of the weavers and the high-tech
air-controlled archive. The weavers returned, literally chilled, from the
archive environment and we can only reflect that the experience was                                                                                                        Figure 20.
deeply affecting for the participants.                                                                                                                                     Workshop
                                                                                                                                                                           participants
                                                                                                                                                                           visit the
                                                                                                                                                                           CordiTex pro-
                                                                                                                                                                           ject archive
                                                                                                                                                                           at Museum
                                                                            Figure 17.                                                                                     Kordillera
                                                                            ‘Mam’ Master                                                                                   in Bagu-
                                                                            weaver speak-                                                                                  io. Credit
                                                                            ing during                                                                                     Amores, Jan
                                                                            the reflective                                                                                 2019
                                                                            plenary at the
                                                                            Learning Tool
                                                                            Kit Workshop.
                                                                            Credit Amores
                                                                            2019             Discussion
                                                                                             The story of our project is that there is a diminishing weaving tradition
                                                                                             within the Cordillera which is evidenced by the low interest among
                                                                                             young members of the communities to become weavers. Elderly
                                                                                             community weavers are and will be the last generation to pass on their
                                                                                             knowledge in an oral tradition. Weaving knowledge has maintained the
                                                                                             ethnolinguistic oral tradition where master weavers teach apprentices,
                                                                                             but the weaving tradition is now in a critical state as the elderly weavers
                                                                            Figure 18        are dying.
                                                                            Weavers visit
                                                                            the Feasts
                                                                            and Rituals                                                                                    Figure 21.
                                                                            Exhibition at                                                                                  Workshop
                                                                            Museum Kor-                                                                                    participants
                                                                            dillera at UoP                                                                                 visit the
                                                                            Baguio. Credit                                                                                 CordiTex pro-
                                                                            Amores, Jan                                                                                    ject archive
                                                                            2019                                                                                           at Museum
                                                                                                                                                                           Kordillera
                                                                                                                                                                           in Bagu-
                                                                                                                                                                           io. Credit
                                                                                                                                                                           Amores, Jan
                                                                                                                                                                           2019



200                                                                                                                                                                                 201
The value of Cordillera weaving has been recognised by museums and         pillars of the Cordillera Weaving Tradition are commendable. However,
by private collectors with cloths being documented, sold and collected     if the position does not change then the outlook for the Cordilleran
globally. The CordiTex project aims to preserve Cordillera weave           communities is depressing and for the women and their families
knowledge via the digital translation of the weave structures and by       and children, it is frightening and predictable. For the remaining
purchasing a specialized TC2 Digital Loom to use to translate the lost     communities who do not find or secure good work within their
patterns. The Museum Kordillera will dedicate an exhibition in 2019        communities, there is the fearful move, to life in a city with its inherent
to the Cordillera weaving tradition, however, this preservation process    risk of exploitation. Centuries of tradition, culture and an autonomous
is disconnected from the communities and weavers from which this           life that was a paradise, is in danger of disappearing. With this in mind
culture of textiles has arisen.                                            we have developed a Learning Tool Kit Action Plan that we earnestly
                                                                           hope can assist in sustaining the weaving culture of the Cordillera.
Weaving has enabled trade and income for the predominantly female
weaving communities within the Cordillera area of Northern Philippines     Digitizing the Cordillera Weaving Tradition Project: 4 Action
for millennia. If weaving declines with the decline in culture (CordiTex   Strand Learning Tool Kit/2019.
2018), a source of income and livelihood for women also declines. The
Creating a Sustainable Textile Future for Women: Digitising Cordillera     Active Practice Actions:
Weaving Tradition project aimed to address this. The weavers met
via the project workshops and activities, expressed the paradise their
                                                                              1. Weave learning can be made more efficient through the use of
work creates via the autonomy and sense of connection to their history,
                                                                              portable learning technology (in the first instance via small sample
community and land their weaving provides. The weavers convinced us
                                                                              looms, but in time new innovations could be developed). This action
to support them to find methods to bring young women into weaving
                                                                              builds upon understanding and knowledge which exists within
practice via a new learning system (Drafting), supported education,
                                                                              the communities (such as the portable backstrap loom) to enable
learning tools and apprenticeship.
                                                                              independent, quick, low resource, weave learning to take place in a
                                                                              variety of settings.
The reflections of the weavers at the UoP Learning Tool Kit workshop
and in the field and the small literature review undertaken so far,
                                                                              2. Within the oral tradition, apprentices become masters and then
have enabled the identification of an emerging link between weaving
                                                                              masters teach. The cycle is regenerated in each generation, but
practice and rice growing. The changes to rice growing as a main
                                                                              this is a slow process, where apprentices do not teach until they
reliable income source for Northern Luzon Communities is changing
                                                                              are masters. Small sample looms enable learning to develop in a
(Glover & Stone, 2018) and weaving creates an opportunity within the
                                                                              constructed spiral rather than circular form. A practice-led model,
changing climate as an enduring occupation which may in the future
become more reliable than agricultural work. Climate change and the
impact of typhoons within the Philippines is having a negative impact                                                                                    Figure 22.
upon the rice growing eco-system and rice growing is under increased                                                                                     Learning Tool
                                                                                                                                                         Kit Action
scrutiny as a possible contributor to climate change (Gabbattiss 2018).
                                                                                                                                                         Strands;

The Indigenous History Curriculum within Philippine Schools (a K-12
level ages 3-12 years) has limited formal learning which aimed to
underpin a nationwide consciousness around the ethnolinguistic history
of the Philippines and in particular an understanding of ethnolinguistic
cultural traditional crafts. The inaccessibility of affordable yarns in
particular Philippine cotton which is mostly exported, has resulted in
higher baseline material costs for weavers. The lack of weaving support
networks, lack of routes to market for sale of weaving and lack of
teaching within Higher Education to support maintenance of Philippine
weaving traditions, all contribute to the problem identified.

The centrality of weaving in the lives of the women of the Cordillera
region must not be underestimated. Weaving and the weaving
communities have protected, clothed, and celebrated this society and
the endeavours of the Crafting Futures project to reinforce the central
202                                                                                                                                                               203
      where learning leads to further learning development enables            capital in the communities can grow, new seedbed pedagogy,
      learners to become More Knowledgeable Others (Vgotsky 1978) so          learning and innovation can emerge. Starting with the youngest
      the process repeats, but in a more efficient and effective manner.      children, weave learning will be a part of their education from a
                                                                              young age.
Networked Practice Actions
                                                                              2. The weaving knowledge in the Cordillera resides within the
                                                                              communities. A bridge from Higher Education to the communities is
      1. A Cordillera Weave Network is required to enable knowledge,
                                                                              needed to develop weave education via global textile conversations,
      resources and economic opportunities to be shared both within and
                                                                              new curriculum development, joint validations and transnational
      beyond their community.
                                                                              initiatives and exchanges.
      2. A professional practice development programme for groups or
      individuals online or as workshops would support practice beyond
      the traditional weaving system.

      3. A co-operative hub or centre for weave education is needed. The
      centre could provide communication, opportunity development
      and enable routes for the sale of work. The centre could link beyond
      the weave tradition to include farming, yarn and fibre development,
      raw material supply and links to climate change based support
      agencies.

      4. Family-based networks will expand as children gain their own
      voices and under-standings of their culture and practices. Children
      will be encouraged to learn in the home with their family, within
      their community and via the development of the K-12 curriculum.

Innovative Practice Actions

      1. The development of design tools and technology which will
      appeal to the young (via digital tools and portable loom technology),
      will support weave based craft and design learning both in the
      community and as a part of schools & HE curriculum.

      2. Weave education would be central to the CordiTex project hub,
      to enable weavers to participate in advanced weave development
      (via TC2 Loom access) to develop innovations and the journey from
      drafting, weaving and digital translation to be made.

      3. Create a living Cordillera weave library for patterns and learning
      samples such as those being woven for the CSTFW project.
      Learning resources would be for weavers to use for free and to be
      easily accessible.

Sustainable Practice Actions

      1. Develop K-12 weave curriculum as a future facing education
      paradigm to enable children to develop knowledge and skills
      which build upon the heritage and resources that are within the
      communities. By facilitating a system in which the knowledge-based

204                                                                                                                                                 205
References                                                                                    Walmsley, W.; (2018) Deep hanging out in the arts: an anthropological approach to
                                                                                              capturing cultural value, International Journal of Cultural Policy, 24:2, 272-291, DOI:10.
                                                                                              1080/10286632.2016.1153081
Albers, A., Weber, N. F., & Cirauqui, M. (2017). On Weaving: New Expanded Edition.
Princeton University Press.                                                                   Vygotsky, L.S; edited by Michael Cole [et al] (1978) Mind in society: The development
                                                                                              of higher psychological processes. Cambridge, Mass; London Harvard University Press.
Adorno, T. (1973) The Jargon of Authenticity. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul Ltd.
Blair, S., & Rillo, M. (2016) Serious Work: How to facilitate meetings and workshops
using Lego® Serious Play® Method. Promeet.
Britt, H., & Shaw, A. (2014). Transitioning between Industry and Education: The Centre        Acknowledgements
for Advanced Textiles (CAT) Case Studies in Digital Textile Printing.                         The author would like to thank the project partner Dr Michelle Stephens, the CordiTex
Buruma, A. (2007). The library as muse: using Liberty’s textile archive 1. Art Libraries      team, in particular Professor Analyn Salvador-Amores and the Chancellor of the
Journal, 32(3), 32-35.                                                                        University of Philippines, Baguio Dr Raymundo Rovillos. The project was initiated by
                                                                                              Professor Alice Kettle. The author thanks the participants in the field and the weavers
Cross, N.; (2011) Design thinking: understanding how designers think and work. Oxford,        and stakeholders who attended the workshop in January 2019 and who kindly offered
Berg.                                                                                         their models, reflections and insights which have enriched this research and paper.
CordiTex (2018) Executive Summary. University of Philippines, Baguio City.                    The project was the result of a Crafts Council & British Council Crafting Futures Grant
                                                                                              and we thank Kendall Robbins from the British Council for her support throughout the
CordiTex (2018) Study Brochure. University of Philippines, Baguio City                        project. Thanks, is also given to Martyn Evans, Kristina Niedderer, Annie Shaw and Joe
Gauntlett, D. (2011). Making is connecting: The social meaning of creativity, from DIY        McCullagh at Manchester School of Art who have supported this research.
and knitting to YouTube and web 2.0. Cambridge: Polity.
Holland, D., Lachicotte Jr., W., Skinner, D., & Cain, C. (1998). Identity and agency in
cultural worlds, Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Gabattiss, J.; (2018) Rice farming up to twice as bad for climate change as previously
thought, study reveals. Accessed: https://www.independent.co.uk/environment/rice-
farming-climate-change-global-warming-india-nitrous-oxide-methane-a8531401.html
Gadamer, H.G., (2006) Truth and Method. Continuum, London.
Glover, D & Stone, G.D.; (2018) Heirloom rice in Ifugao: an ‘anti-commodity’ in the
process of commodification, The Journal of Peasant Studies, 45:4, 776 804, DOI:
10.1080/03066150.2017.1284062
Kelly, R. (2017). Ikebana: a collaborative design pedagogy. The Design Journal, 20
(sup1), S1093-S1105.
Lave, J.; Wenger, E.; (1991) Situated Learning. Legitimate peripheral participation,
Cambridge: University of Cambridge Press
Lee, A. & Poynton, C., (2000) Culture & Text. Rowman & Littlefield, London.
Lego® www.lego.com/en-us/seriousplay/trademark-guidelines
Maslow, A.; (1943) accessed https://www.learning-theories.com/maslows-hierarchy-of-
needs.html
Meyer, J.H.F. & Land, R., (2003) ‘Threshold concepts and troublesome knowledge (1):
Linkages to ways of thinking and practicing within the disciplines. Improving Student
Learning – Ten Years On. C. Rust (Ed), OCSLD, Oxford.
Meyer, J.H.F. & Land, R., (2005) ‘Threshold concepts and troublesome knowledge (2):
Epistemological considerations and a conceptual framework for teaching and learning’.
R. High Educ 49: 373. doi:10.1007/s10734-004-6779-5
NESTA Theory of Change method (accessed via https://www.nesta.org.uk/toolkit/
theory-change/)
Rosaldo, R. 1980. Ilongot headhunting 1883–1974. A study in society and history.
Stanford, CA, USA: Stanford University Press cited in Glover, D & Stone, G.D.; (2018)
Sanchez, A.; (1990) The Textile Industry in the Philippines and Thailand: A comparison.
Journal of Philippine Development. No 30. Vol XVII, No 1. 1990. Accessed: https://pdfs.
semanticscholar.org/ebf7/ef18af2782a55949e7da6d727b37ff5a77d8.pdf
Tolentino, JR. D.; (2018) Feasts of Merit: wealth, status and feasting in Luzon Cordillera.
Museum Kordilera, University of Philippines, Baguio City.


206                                                                                                                                                                                        207
        Design research
         for educational
                change:
         Methodologies
       for exploring the
      future of learning
          Michael Kerres and Barbara Getto
208                                     209
Abstract                                                                      a plau-sible model existed explaining the causes and effects of a social
Education as a scholarly discipline – separate from Philosophy – was          phenomenon it is not obvious how to draw a conclusion about the best
established as the society’s demand for an educated workforce of              ways to implement change.
teachers became stronger in the 18th century. Whereas Biology,
Physics or Psychology relate to basic phenomena of life and nature,           As a consequence of the “PISA-shock“, several public measures for
Education, like Eco-nomics and Law, is strongly associated with the           research have been setup. A recent evaluation of the program on
increasingly complex institution of education: primary and secondary          empirical educational research by the federal ministry of education
schools, vocational education, higher education etc.. The investment          revealed the limited impact of this research to the public discussion
in research in the field of Education, therefore, very often is questioned    and changes in the educational system. Therefore, starting in 2018 the
as to its contribution to the solving of problems in the practical field of   federal ministry of education started a new framework for empirical
education.                                                                    research in education with a distinct focus on change projects, design
                                                                              based approaches and the analyses of success factors for change. The
Educational Science shares its roots with several disciplines: firstly        learning lab of Uni-versity of Duisburg-Essen is responsible for the meta-
with philosophical inquiries and historical studies, the tradition of         project in the field of digitalization in edu-cation, accompanying and
empirical research in Psychology and Sociology, but it also relates           supporting the around 50 projects sponsored in this line of research.
to other disciplines, e.g. educational management and economics,              Furthermore, the meta-project – based on a network of several
technological and architectural aspects related to the infrastructure         university and national insti-tutes – is devoted to the joint development
of schools. All these disciplines have long his-tories of elaborating a       of a methodology of design-based research.
diversity of theoretical approaches as well as research methodologies
and methods, standards for scholarly research and communication.              Design research in education
Educational Science, then, is a situated at the intersection of all these     A design approach to education is based on the insight that even
traditions. Over the time, the focus of attention has shifted between the     the most thorough analysis of learning and education does not
various reference disciplines with their corresponding methodologies:         deliver the necessary knowledge about how to develop learn-ing and
from philosophy and history, to psychology and sociology and other            education in the field. This insight might be accepted by a larger part
reference disciplines. Although still covering a wide range, the preferred    of the educational research community, but it still is the question if this
research methods and standards in educational re-search have changed          knowledge for change is to be understood as an enterprise of a new type
but without developing a unique methodology of educational science.           of scholarly research or as a problem of application in the practi-cal field
Today, the mainstream of educational research is devoted to                   – beyond research. Therefore, the establishment of a design approach
quantitative and qualitative ap-proaches analyzing individual learning,       for educational research is still under heavy discussion, especially since
education institutions and underlaying social processes from an               design research approaches are still in its infancy: not all development
interdisciplinary perspective mainly relating to philosophy, psychology       projects that are somehow being implementing with partners in the
and sociology. These analyses provide models and theories to better           field can be interpreted as design research. Furthermore, since design
understand how learning and education function and what are relevant          research still is not widely established it is difficult to receive funding
dimensions to explain diversity and inequity. In the 1990s, large scale       for these – still developing – approaches. Therefore, also it is often
assessments were started internationally that allow to monitor and            criticized that we do not posses enough knowledge about change pro-
compare learning achievements in common subjects in secondary                 cess it is not widely acknowledged that this kind of question also has to
schools. For some participating states, the re-sults of the PISA and          be addressed as a re-search question with a clear methodological focus.
other assessments – discussed by a wider public – led to frustration: In      Therefore, it is of utmost importance to re-late to other disciplines that
these cases, the self-perception of a culture valuing education highly        have a longer tradition in referring to concepts of design.
(and spending high amounts of money in education) did not match
the results of these tests. This experience moti-vated a wide discussion      “Teaching” and “instruction” have been described with reference to
of measure to take to improve the quality of learning in schools. Nu-         liberal arts, an activity that cannot be planned nor explained, emerging
merous suggestions were brought up by politicians, researchers as well        from the encounter of person to person. This posi-tion, strongly held
as from the broader pub-lic and discussed in the media. Interestingly,        in a traditional view of education as “Bildung”, has been opposed by
these suggestions – based on the same results – could be completely           a tech-nological view, interpreting teaching as an activity that should
contradictory and all starting points for change seemed plausible:            follow successful principles of teaching that have been derived from
school buildings, curricula, nutrition, teacher training – anything could     empirical research (vgl. Reiser, 1987). In this case, tech-nology does
be argued for. These discussions also showed that the measurement of          not refer to technical devices or (digital) media; it refers to the body
learning achievements, though illuminating, does not provide sufficient
information about possible mechanisms for change. Even more basic, if
210                                                                                                                                                          211
of systematic knowledge of a domain (e.g. the technology of building              process could impede with the success of a project (Goodyear, 1994).
bridges).                                                                         In a traditional approach, a requirements analysis leads to a software
                                                                                  specifi-cation which then – in a next phase – is implemented. “Errors”
Both positions have been abandoned. From a perspective of systems                 in the design are not anticipated and might question the success of
theory, Luhman & Schorr (1982) have pointed out the deficit of                    a project, essentially, if detected to late. “Errors” are a disas-ter, are
technology in the professional activity of teachers: The success of               indicators of bad planning. However, in a typical development project
teaching does not rely on the quality of the teacher’s interventions              in the field of education, they can also be seen as insights that might
alone, it is a co-construction. When we refer to explaining instruction as        open the direction to new qualities. This view, however, necessitates an
design then we acknowledge that it should be positioned somewhere                 organization of the design process that follows a model that has been
between an act of fine arts and a technology. With the first edition of           discussed as “agile” in recent years. Surprisingly, this line of discussion
“principles of instructional design” in from Robert Gagné and Leslie              heavily discussed in computer engineering is not discussed intensively,
Briggs the design perspective on instruction was established. Initially,          although it seems attractive to address how to systematically integrate
the seminal work of Gagné and his research group at Florida State                 learning in a learning development project.
University, Tallahassee, was based on research and development in the
military – not in the school sector. Therefore, the group was confronted          Kerres (2018) explains that the design process has to be adopted to the
with a completely dif-ferent set of conditions for teaching and learning,         conditions of the design project. Routine projects with tight resources,
e.g. teaching was more related to “training”; large groups of learners            for example, will need different designs that more exploratory innovation
– spread around the world – had to be addressed; standardization                  projects. He, therefore, phrases the term “design your design”:
had a high priority. With this background, Gagné reached out to                   instructional designers should not follow an instructional design model
using print media and video for in-struction in the early 1960s, setting          they have learned. Pro-fessional designers should be able to construct
up arrangements that combined classroom teaching with textbook                    of a design model appropriate for a given prob-lem. The model from
materials, video instructions delivered via TV around the world to large          Kerres does provide criteria when to follow a more sequential or a
groups of learners. Besides this initial context, the various editions of the     more iterative model. Essentially, this approach questions the basic
instructional design-textbook, which have appeared since, always were             assumption that instructional de-sign should follow “the one best” ID-
broadly addressing the various context of education, but they were not            model. It follows empirical analysis of routines instructional designers
restricted to the perspective of (typically: secondary) school in other           practice in their fields. The demonstrate that in most cases they do
ID-models. They did reflect, however, the transition of the theoretical           not follow a spe-cific model (and worse: some / many even never have
discussion in instructional design from behaviorism to cognitive                  heard of any id-model, but supposedly are still successfully performing
approaches. However, their approach consistently kept the focus and               their duties. Professionalism in the context of instructional design means
the starting point of all instructional design on the specification of            creating a flexible approach – based on the state of the art and science
learning results and then developing the design backwards.                        of learning and teaching – and reflecting on the results of the routine
                                                                                  (which might lead to a reconsideration of these routines).
Several models of instructional design have been developed over the
years. Andrew & Goodson (1980) were the first to publish a comparison             Approaches to design-based research in education
of different models. They found a set of similarities but criticized that the     In the 1990s, several educational researchers were confronted with
models would not indicate their scope and the operating conditions.               an increasing pressure from funding agencies, foundations and
They assumed that their design model would be applicable in all                   education authorities to deliver more concise and practical results
contexts, for all topics, ranges, target groups and institutional sector          for the educational sector and to make a better contribution to the
(Lowyck & Elen, 1994).                                                            development of so-ciety at large. Design-based research (DBR) was
                                                                                  an answer of the scientific community, which gained a lot of approval
Dick & Carey (1985) published a model that organized instructional                among the research community. Brown (1992) hat introduced the term
design following a rather generic sequence of steps with the acronym              “design experiments” relating to Stokes (1997), who was referring to
of ADDIE (Analysis, Design, Development, Evalua-tion). The textbook               “use-inspired basic re-search” and Pasteur’s quadrant. The paper from
has been published in many editions since and is typical in viewing the           the “The Design Based Research Collective” (2003) has been highly
de-sign process as a linear process with distinct stages. The underlying          cited and the a special issue on DBR in the Journal of the Learning Sci-
concept of a “waterfall” – as discussed in software engineering – has             ences, introduced by Barab & Squire (2004), with a paper from Collins,
been questioned in the realm of software engineering: With a waterfall,           Joseph & Bielczyc (2004), received a lot of attention.
it follows a strict direction and if it has passed the fall it will not be able
to go back. In the development of software, it had turned out that the            Basically, DBR defines the process of research as an iterative course of
application of a highly sequen-tial model for organizing the development          continuous inquiry and optimization in a number of trials in differing
212                                                                                                                                                             213
contexts. A DBR project should, therefore, rely on a set of consecutive                              researcher as an observer                                Figure 1.
trials where a certain conceptual model or instructional approach can                                                                                         Dimensions
be tested and improved. The analysis of a new concept for developing                                                                                          of research
                                                                                         evaluation research         experimental trials                      in the field
reading comprehension, for example, could be tested in a series of
                                                                                                                                                              of education
consecutive experiments in parallel classes at several schools. This short                                 pattern
                                                                                                                     case studies                             (allocation
description shows why DBR received such a high popularity in short                       ethnography                                                          might vary)
time, especially from researchers with a background in quantitative                                                           pilots
                                                                                                   best practices
methodology: Proposing a con-secutive series of experiments for                 existing                                                     new
validating and improving a concept is not challenging a tradi-tional            practices                                                  practices
view of empirical research. In general, research has always relied on the                self-reflective             implementation research
idea of a contin-uous stream of studies – from different research groups                  practitionar                   design-based research
– cumulating scholarly knowledge. Therefore, it might be questioned if
                                                                                                   dialogical                          prototyping
the basic idea of DBR as an iterative process is adding a new approach
                                                                                                   research
to this general perspective. Furthermore, in many cases it simply is                                                          action research
not possible to implement a research project as a series of studies,
especially with projects that are developing new programs or artifacts                                researcher as an agent
(e.g., for digital learning) and in conditions where parallel groups do not
                                                                              education. It is important to note, that the analysis of given practices in
exist (which is often typical outside of schools).
                                                                              the field do not automatically yield new directions and do not answer
                                                                              the question how to develop new measures to innovate teaching and
On the other hand, we have a long tradition of approaches to social
                                                                              learning in the various sectors of education. In recent years, textbooks
research that are rejecting the idea of learners or teachers being objects
                                                                              have emerged that reflect on the discussion of these approaches and
of research. Learning and teaching in an educa-tional setting is a
                                                                              provide guidance to researchers in the field of design based research
complex situation that cannot be reduced to scientific models consisting
                                                                              (McKenney & Reeves, 2018; Akker, Gravemeijer, McKen-ney, & Nieveen,
of a set of isolated if-then statements. Instead they perceive research as
                                                                              2006).
a complex social interaction between people in different roles. In this
tradition of research, several approaches have been developed that differ
                                                                              Design research in the field of research on “Educational Technology”
in their conceptualization of the roles of the various players. In action
                                                                              Research on Educational Technology has attracted a large
research academia is mainly concerned with building and supporting
                                                                              interdisciplinary community of re-searchers bringing together scholars
the development of solu-tions for practical challenges (Bradbury, 2015;
                                                                              from various backgrounds. In this context, the discussion of design-
Edwards-Groves & Kemmis, 2016a; McMillan & Schumacher, 2010;
                                                                              based research does have an additional connotation since we are
Zuber-Skerritt, 2003). With “teachers as reflective practitioners” (Schön,
                                                                              addressing the devel-opment and delivery of a technical artifact that
2017) and the “teachers as researchers” (Edwards-Groves & Kemmis,
                                                                              exhibits certain characteristics on its surface and inside. The terminology
2016b) approaches, teach-ers are trained and supported to setup a
                                                                              of design, in this context, seems to have a closer relation the attributes of
research study in their own field. Teacher’s experienc-es and reflections
                                                                              these artifacts. However, from the educational perspective, our primary
are valued as constructions of their professional activity in the field.
                                                                              concern are not these obvious attributes that can be “designed”,
These utterances inform us about the perception of a certain part of the
                                                                              we are mainly interested in the structural el-ements a) of the design
educational field and at the same time they contribute to the creation
                                                                              process in the various stages from planning to implementing in a
of the social reality they describe. Research helps to record these
                                                                              social environment and b) of the design patterns, models, concepts
views and make them available to others as a source for professional
                                                                              etc. inscribed into the artifacts. Meanwhile, there are some textbooks
development and critical discussion (Cross, 2007; van Akker & Nieveen,
                                                                              related to design-based research in the field of educa-tional technology
2017).
                                                                              (Spector, Merrill, Merrienboer, & Driscoll, 2007; Clark & Mayer, 2016;
                                                                              Euler & Sloane, 2014; Tulodziecki, Grafe, & Herzig, 2013; Savin-Baden
To some extent, current research on teaching and learning essentially
                                                                              & Tombs, 2017; Beetham & Sharpe, 2019)
is conceptualized as “basic research” in the field of education, without
addressing the underlying gap between edu-cational research and
                                                                              At the University Duisburg-Essen’s Learning Lab, our focus is on learning
practice. But increasingly, researchers follow different paths to actively
                                                                              innovations with digital technology. “Exploring the Future of Learning“
answer the basic challenge of knowledge transfer. These different
                                                                              - the slogan describes the mission of our research group. With a staff of
approaches can be sketched around two dimensions shown in Figure
                                                                              about 40 people, the lab is developing digital innovations for schools,
1: Researchers are more or less engaged in the field as observers or
                                                                              higher education and adult education following a design-based
actors, and they can focus on current or new practices in the field of
214                                                                                                                                                                    215
approach to educational research based on a dialogue of research and             projects. The meta-project supports transfer activities of the projects
practice. In a previous project, the lab has been involved with meta-            and generates attention and visibility for the project work.
analytical approaches to synthetizing educational research on digital
learning (Zawacki-Richter, Kerres, Buntins, Bond, & Bedenlier, 2019).            Educational practice presents itself differently structured in the
Currently, the lab has received a mandate for the 6-year meta-project            different educational stages or sectors and different actors have to
„digitization in educa-tion“ supporting and accompanying the various             be included. The meta-project focuses on educational organ-izations
research (around 60) projects that are funded by the federal ministry            in different sectors: primary, secondary, vocational, higher and adult
of education and research in the new framework for empirical research            education. The institutional frameworks, concepts, conditions for
in education. Based on an analysis of the effects of earlier funding             success and implications of digital education differ considerably in the
measures, the federal ministry is aiming at strengthening the impact of          individual sectors and the interfaces between formal, non-formal and
funded projects in educational research to answering cur-rent challenges         informal learning change depending on the stage of life (even under
in the educational sector. The ministry has established various meta-            the conditions of digitiza-tion). For this purpose, the consortium was
projects (e.g. in the field of cultural education, professionalization or        formed for the meta-project, whose partners bring in special expertise´s
digitalization) to develop new strategies for the projects to improve            to the various sectors and, consequently, to different stages of life.
exchange between research projects and to increase their outreach,               At its core, the meta-project deals with the fundamental question of
to foster the dialogue between educational research, practice,                   how educational research can exploit the potential of digitization for
administration and politics, to improve the public communication and             the various educational sectors and thus shape the future of “education
visibility of educational research and to, eventually, increase their impact     in the digital world”. The traditional view of project work is based on
onto society. Furthermore, the meta-projects will also con-tribute to            providing project results - after completion of a project - in a transfer
the methodological advancement of design-based approaches to                     phase “of practice”. The transfer problem in the context of pilot projects
educational re-search. They conduct research workshops and foster the            oft he federal state commission was already discussed at the end of the
adoption of these approaches and will develop new methods to help                1980s and was one of the main reasons why funding for individual pilot
and guide the funded projects.                                                   projects was abandoned in favor of programme funding (Nickolaus,
                                                                                 Gönnenwein, & Petsch, 2010). Approaches to transfer as unidirectional
The concept of the meta-project and its relevance to develop                     communication (from research to practice) are too shortsighted and do
design-based approaches                                                          not meet the demands mentioned. Whereas the traditional views of
The meta-project on “digitization in education” is a joint effort of the         scholarly knowledge dissemination perceive “transfer” as an activity
national Leibniz-Institutes of Educational Research (DIPF, Frankfurt), of        taking place after research has been completed, the meta-project
Adult Education (DIE, Bonn) and of Knowledge Media (IWM, Tübingen)               wants to foster a view to transfer as an ongoing activity interwoven
with the management at the Learning Lab of University Duisburg-                  in all phases of research beginning from the development of research
Essen. It con-tributes to putting the current projects of the research           questions, the design of a research project, the implementation and
focus and further funding lines for “digi-talization” in the framework           interpretation of results to the communi-cation in the field. Therefore,
program “Empirical Educational Research” into an overarching scien-              the major task of this meta-research is directed to the organiza-tion of
tific and social framework, prepares developments in the research field          communication between stakeholders in the field: identifying relevant
scientifically, identifies research gaps and promotes the networking of the      stakeholders, developing strategies and measures to address them and
scientists with each other and the exchange with educational practice.           intensify bidirectional communication in analog and digital settings,
It reflects in particular on the creation of design-oriented educational         which contributes equally to theory building in the community of
research and its knowledge communication, which contributes equally              researchers as well as to the communication of experiences on solutions
to the formation of theo-ry and knowledge within science as well as to           in the fields of educa-tional practice.
problem solving in the fields of educational prac-tice and policy. It aims
to further develop the methodology of design-oriented educational re-            Conclusions
search. “Transfer” is not understood as a follow-up activity at the end of       The underlying question is: what does it mean to conceptualize
the project, but as an integral part of the interaction of actors, which is to   educational research as a design endeavor? On the one hand, academia
be organized as a dialogue between re-search projects and educational            has to insist on claiming for “freedom of research” – de-fining research
practice and policy. Results of the funded as well as other re-search            as an important enterprise for its own sake and not primarily as a service
projects are processed and central research questions dealt with from            to edu-cational institutions. On the other hand, educational research
a meta-perspective. The activities of the meta-project are designed in           in many cases does have an inter-est in contributing to educational
a complementary way to the transfer activities that are anchored in the          change and in delivering insights for theses agendas. There-fore, it
                                                                                 becomes of utmost importance to develop and reflect on dialogical

216                                                                                                                                                           217
practices of actors in the field. Over man decades, quantitative and      References
qualitative approaches for social research have been developed and
have produces a more ore less solid body of acknowledged procedures       Akker, J. van den, Gravemeijer, K., McKenney, S., & Nieveen, N. (2006). Educational
and quality measures to evaluate research proposals and results. In the   Design Re-search (1. Aufl.). London: Routledge.
field of design-based re-search in education we are just beginning to     Andrews, D. H., & Goodson, L. A. (1980). A comparative analysis of models of
establish a debate for developing these measures.                         instructional de-sign. Journal of instructional development, 3, 2–16.
                                                                          Barab, S., & Squire, K. (2004). Introduction: Design-Based Research: Putting a Stake in
                                                                          the Ground. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 13(1), 1–14.
                                                                          Beetham, H., & Sharpe, R. (2019). Rethinking Pedagogy for a Digital Age: Principles and
                                                                          Practic-es of Design. Routledge.
                                                                          Bradbury, H. (2015). The Sage handbook of action research. Sage.
                                                                          Brown, A. (1992). Design experiments: Theoretical and methodological challenges in
                                                                          creating complex interventions in classroom settings. Journal of the Learning Sciences,
                                                                          2, 141–178.
                                                                          Clark, R. C., & Mayer, R. E. (2016). E-Learning and the Science of Instruction: Proven
                                                                          Guidelines for Consumers and Designers of Multimedia Learning. John Wiley & Sons.
                                                                          Collins, A., Joseph, D., & Bielaczyc, K. (2004). Design Research: Theoretical and
                                                                          Methodological Issues. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 13(1), 15–42.
                                                                          Cross, N. (2007). Forty years of design research. Design Studies, 28(1), 1–4. https://doi.
                                                                          org/10.1016/j.destud.2006.11.004
                                                                          Dick, W., & Carey, L. M. (1985). The systematic design of instruction. Glenview, Il.: Scott,
                                                                          For-esman.
                                                                          Edwards-Groves, C., & Kemmis, S. (2016a). Pedagogy, Education and Praxis:
                                                                          understanding new forms of intersubjectivity through action research and practice
                                                                          theory. Educational Ac-tion Research, 24(1), 77–96.
                                                                          Edwards-Groves, C., & Kemmis, S. (2016b). Pedagogy, Education and Praxis:
                                                                          understanding new forms of intersubjectivity through action research and practice
                                                                          theory. Educational Ac-tion Research, 24(1), 77–96. https://doi.org/10.1080/0965079
                                                                          2.2015.1076730
                                                                          Euler, D., & Sloane, P. F. E. (Hrsg.). (2014). Design-Based Research. Stuttgart: Franz
                                                                          Steiner.
                                                                          Goodyear, P. (1994). Foundations for courseware engineering. In R. D. Tennyson (Hrsg.),
                                                                          Auto-mating Instructional Design, Development, and Delivery. (NATO ASI Serie F. 119).
                                                                          Berlin: Springer.
                                                                          Kerres, M. (2018). Mediendidaktik. Konzeption und Entwicklung digitaler Lernangebote
                                                                          (5. Aufl.). Berlin: de Gruyter Oldenbourg.
                                                                          Lowyck, J., & Elen, J. (1994). Modelling I.D. research. Proceedings of the first Workshop
                                                                          of the Special Interest Group on Instructional Design of EARLI. Gehalten auf der KU
                                                                          Leuven. KU Leuven.
                                                                          Luhmann, N., & Schorr, K. E. (1982). Zwischen Technologie und Selbstreflexion: Fragen
                                                                          an die Pädagogik. Frankfurt: Suhrkamp.
                                                                          McKenney, S., & Reeves, T. C. (2018). Conducting Educational Design Research. https://
                                                                          doi.org/10.4324/9781315105642
                                                                          McMillan, J. H., & Schumacher, S. (2010). Research in Education: Evidence-Based
                                                                          Inquiry, 7th Edition. MyEducationLab Series. Pearson.
                                                                          Nickolaus, R., Gönnenwein, A. & Petsch, C. Z (2010). Die Transferproblematik im
                                                                          Kontext von Modellversuchen und Modellversuchsprogrammen. Zeitschrift für
                                                                          Erziehungswissenschaft (2010) 13: 39-58. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11618-010-0112-0
                                                                          Reiser, R. A. (1987). Instructional Technology: A History. In R. M. Gagné (Hrsg.),
                                                                          Instructional technology: Foundations (S. 11–48). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
                                                                          Associates.


218                                                                                                                                                                      219
Savin-Baden, M., & Tombs, G. (2017). Research methods for education in the digital
age. Bloomsbury Publishing.
Schön, D. A. (2017). The reflective practitioner: How professionals think in action.
Routledge.
Spector, J. M., Merrill, D., Merrienboer, J. J. G., & Driscoll, M. (2007). Handbook of
Research on Educational Communications and Technology (0003 Aufl.). Mahwah, NJ:
LEA.
Stokes, D. E. (1997). Pasteur’s Quadrant: Basic Science and Technological Innovation.
Washing-ton, DC: Brookings Institution.
The Design-Based Research Collective. (2003). Design-Based Research: An Emerging
Paradigm for Educational Inquiry. Educational Researcher, 32(1), 5–8.
Tulodziecki, G., Grafe, S., & Herzig, B. (2013). Gestaltungsorientierte Bildungsforschung
und Di-daktik. Theorie – Empirie – Praxis. Bad Heilbrunn: Klinkhardt.
van Akker, J., & Nieveen, N. (2017). The Role of Teachers in Design Research in Education.
In S. Doff & R. Komoss (Hrsg.), Making Change Happen: Wandel im Fachunterricht
analysieren und gestalten (S. 75–86). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-658-14979-6_9
Zawacki-Richter, O., Kerres, M., Buntins, K., Bond, M., & Bedenlier, S. (Hrsg.). (2019).
Systematic Reviews in Educational Research: Methodology, Perspectives and
Application. Berlin: Springer Nature.
Zuber-Skerritt, O. (2003). New Directions in Action Research. Routledge.




220                                                                                          221
      The ripple effects
        of social design
           Eva Knutz and Thomas Markussen
222                                    223
Abstract                                                                      the game has the impact that was hypothesized and substantially
Policymakers and the public sector increasingly turn to social design         accounted for in the research application.
to mitigate the urgent challenges of the welfare state. With public
sector collaboration and funding follow a requirement to measure and          Does that mean that we did not change anything? Or that no value was
evaluate the change effect and the impact of social design practices.         created during all the meetings and co-design workshops we held with
Typically this requirement is premised on evidence-based ideals fitting       incarcerated fathers, their children, family therapists, prison officers and
well with neoliberal agendas and new public management. However, in           managers? If value is perceived in a narrow evidence-based sense, then
this paper we argue that there is a need for developing an evaluation         from that point of view the change failed to happen. But if we widen
culture to supplement this predominant model. The evidence-based              our view to include the entire process from beginning to end, then we
model is primarily concerned with design outcomes, while neglecting           are, in fact, able to detect various forms of change and value that this
how social value may manifest itself as what we call ripple effects from      project delivered. In this paper we provide an overview of these ripple
the ‘fuzzy front end’ to the implementation and evaluation of a given         effects that occurred through and beyond the project by drawing upon
design project. Using a social design case – a game-based intervention        the large amount of data that was gathered during more than three
designed for family visits in maximum-security prisons – we identify a        years of study.
range of ripple effects leading to notably three types of values: social
value for the benefit of the people we designed for and with; demand          As social designers, we align with the characteristics given by
value, which refers to the value that an organization/client gains from       Armstrong, Bailey, Julier, & Kimbell, 2014 (p. 15). This approach
implementing a design artifact or service, and research value, i.e.           essentially consists of using participatory design activities to “make
improving the research study design and direction through insights. To        change happen towards collective and social ends, rather than
account for the ripple effects of social design, we shall elaborate and       predominantly commercial objectives.” Social ends can be defined
advance Sanders & Stappers’ (2008) influential design model.                  as “small but significant qualitative changes at a human scale that are
                                                                              seen as beneficial for marginalized or vulnerable groups in society”
Introduction                                                                  (Markussen, 2017, p. 169). This is precisely what makes the design
Social design has spread as a practice across various domains (crime          intention in social design different from other similar approaches such
prevention, healthcare, education, etc.) and is increasingly moving           as social innovation or social entrepreneurship – disciplines that aim at
towards long-term and more complex projects that require engagement           making large-scale transformation happen either by repairing system
throughout the entire design process to ensure a sustainable outcome.         errors or by exploiting unforeseen market opportunities.
We are currently engaged in such a long-term project within the criminal
justice system. Together with the Danish Prison and Probation Services        In our work, we have proposed that the value of social design can be
– and various groups of prisoners, children, family therapists and prison     properly understood as a matter of caring for disadvantaged people or
officers – we have co-designed a serious, yet playful social game for the     groups (Knutz et. al, 2017). Furthermore, we have shown that a narrative
visiting facilities in maximum-security prisons (Knutz et al. 2017, 2019;     perspective can increase knowledge of how social value can be a
Markussen & Knutz, forthcoming).                                              matter of enabling families to share ‘family narratives’ and negotiate
                                                                              and navigate identities (Knutz & Markussen, forthcoming). Yet, social
The purpose of the game is to make the prison visit enjoyable and             value is still hard to grasp, and that is a problem for foundations,
meaningful for prisoners’ children (age 11-18) and enable family              policymakers, non-profit organizations and researchers working with a
talk about difficult matters. Initiatives such as these are designed for      public sector under pressure. If we cannot assess social value, then we
children to help them cope with parental incarceration; but it is also part   cannot evaluate and communicate the impact of, for instance, social
of institutional rehabilitative schemes aimed at strengthening family         initiatives that aim at improving the conditions for citizens who are
relations and support inmates in becoming better fathers and citizens         traumatized, facing a life-threatening disease, poverty, loneliness or any
upon post release. In the autumn of 2018 the game was distributed to          kind of loss that many of us will inevitably face in the course of our lives
all Danish prisons. It has been translated into English, and correctional     (see also Mulgan, 2010, 2014; Preskill & Beer, 2012).
services in several countries (including the UK, US, Estonia, Australia,
and Sweden) have shown a keen interest in the game’s potential for            Initially, in this paper, we will position ourselves briefly in relation to the
improving visiting facilities and the wellbeing of prisoners’ children.       “social turn.” Secondly, we will apply Sanders & Stappers’ (2008) useful
                                                                              model to a case project to provide insight into the participatory design
However, this success story is counterbalanced by the failure of              research activities from the ‘fuzzy front end’ of our design process to the
documenting the evidence-based design outcome. It was simply not              actual implementation of the project. Here we have singled out a limited
possible – using the original research study design – to measure whether      number of participatory design research activities to give the reader an
                                                                              understanding of value and change in the project. Thirdly, we introduce
224                                                                                                                                                             225
what we consider to be the main contribution of this paper: our Ripple          Co-design and participation as value
Effects Model. This model elaborates on Sanders & Stappers’ model               A decade ago, Sanders & Stappers (2008) argued that the shift from
and includes a map of when and how a design research project activates          user-centered design (user as subject) to co-design (user as partner)
change. It aims at capturing the value of change throughout a project           would enable designers and non-designers to work more closely
as well as the difference between what a project aims at changing and           together in the design process in order to support more sustainable
evaluating and all the unplanned changes that a project might activate.         design outcomes and ways of living with design. Sanders & Stappers
We refer to these changes as ripple effects and account for the value           and others concerned with Participatory Design (PD) and Co-design
they hold for the people we design for (and with): the organization that        have convincingly described the importance of making activities and
implements the design and the research team.                                    participatory methods (cultural probes, generative tools, design games,
                                                                                experience prototypes etc.). These activities involve construction and
Do we have evidence of the change we claim we contribute? Not fully.            transformation of meaning from the explorative ‘fuzzy front end’ and
Our documentation consists of both hard evidence (recordings and                early design ideas to implementation and post design (see Figure 1).
transcribed interviews) as well as soft evidence (observations, design          They have also usefully visualized how user-involvement – designing
ethnographic documentation and design game outcomes). For now,                  “for” and “with” the user – might change throughout a project,
we will leave it up to the reader to evaluate whether this is good – or         depending on what participatory activities and formats are applied
good enough (cf. Thorpe and Gamman 2011).                                       (Brandt et al., 2012; Sanders & Stappers, 2014).

The Cornerstones of Social Design: Social Change and                            But since PD has been applied to various research disciplines and
Participation                                                                   contexts to reinforce user involvement, the concept of participation has
                                                                                been in danger of losing its core values (Vines et al., 2013). For instance,
Social change and social value                                                                                                                                 Figure 1.
Due to the pressure on the welfare state (caused by fiscal crises,                                                                                             Sanders &
migration, aging, a declining workforce, etc.) policy makers have                                                                                              Stappers’
urged the creative sector to act responsibly to societal problems                                                                                              Model (2008)
and vulnerable communities in society. The design community has
attempted to meet this requirement through approaches such as social
innovation, social entrepreneurship or social design. Each of these
approaches tries to meet social needs by fostering change based on
different value norms. Elsewhere, we have argued at length that social
value in social innovation refers to “what is good for society,” in broad
terms to benefit large populations. In social entrepreneurship, social
value is tightly linked with a concern also to perform financially; and
in social design, social value refers to “the fostering of a small, but
                                                                                the original social engagement of the approach is sometimes conflated
decisive qualitative change in the form of redistributing identities and
                                                                                with consumerist ideas of “democratic innovation” (Björgvinsson et
interpersonal relations” (Markussen, 2017, p. 169).
                                                                                al., 2010). Critical voices from the PD community have therefore called
                                                                                for refreshed perspectives on how design researchers conceptualize,
Yet, in discussing and evaluating what worked and what did not work
                                                                                organize and maintain participation (Iversen & Dindler, 2014). According
in a project that aims at fostering social change, social value is still hard
                                                                                to Vines et al. (2013), participation is never value-free. There is always
to account for and difficult to assess. Geoff Mulgan (2010) argues that
                                                                                someone who initiates, directs and benefits from user participation
social value, in social innovation, should be approached as subjective,
                                                                                in design and therefore the configuration of participation should be
malleable and variable rather than assuming that it is objective, fixed
                                                                                critically examined. So how do we evaluate the value of participation?
and stable. In our case analysis we elaborate on this conception by
                                                                                Vines and his colleagues (2015) suggest addressing the gap between the
showing how social value is highly influenced by participatory practices
                                                                                claimed values and the actual practice of participation again by asking,
and seems to have the capacity for adaptive change. By scrutinizing the
                                                                                who initiates, directs and benefits from participation. Further, Smith &
values of our social design project, we identify a range of unforeseen
                                                                                Iversen (2018) introduce three dimensions of participatory engagement
changes that have affected the final outcome (the design itself), the
                                                                                (scoping, developing and scaling) in order to account for value at
implementation of the design, the research evaluation study as well as
                                                                                different stages. Yet, the problem remains to explain how participation
our interpersonal relations with participants and other stakeholders in
                                                                                might have an impact on the evaluation and the implementation of the
the project.
                                                                                design outcome.
226                                                                                                                                                                     227
Participation is often just used as a means for involving stakeholders        During the process of designing the game, several meetings and PD
along the process, aligning the design concept with actual users’ needs       activities were organized to create a sustainable foundation for both
to make a better and more sustainable design. But it is rarely evaluated      development and evaluation. These activities can be grouped into
how PD processes might change the evaluation study design in terms            three categories:
of hypothesis, methods and theoretical foundations. By applying
Sanders & Stappers’ Model to our project we will critically examine how                                                                                  Figure 2. The
                                                                                                                                                         board game
PD processes and co-design workshops changed our evaluation and
                                                                                                                                                         Captivated,
research study design along the way, from pre-design to design-after-                                                                                    2018
design. In so doing, the gap between the claimed values and the values
gained through participation may become transparent.

Case project: Designing games for prisons
The case project we draw upon is the Social Games Against Crime
project (2015–2018). The overall aim of this project was to develop
and implement a game for the Prison and Probation Service’s visiting
program in order to help children maintain and build upon the
relationship with their incarcerated fathers. This aim is motivated by
studies in criminology arguing that the facilitation of contact between
incarcerated parents and their children may have a positive effect
both on parenting post release (Holt & Miller, 1972; Lösel et al., 2012;
Markson et al., 2015) and on the children’s development and ability to
cope with the consequences of parental incarceration (Arditti, 2003;
Hairston, 1998). Furthermore narrative studies indicate that by allowing
prisoners and their children to tell and share narratives, the bonds               -   PD activities with the organization (the Prison & Probation
between them can be strengthened to the benefit of the children’s well-                Service; prison management and prison officers) to ensure
being (see e.g. Fivush, Bohanek, & Zaman, 2011; Saltzman, Pynoos,                      sustainable foundation for implementation.
Lester, Layne, & Beardslee, 2013).                                                 -   PD activities with the end-users (fathers in prison; children
                                                                                       who have a father in prison and other family members) to
Our final design – a board game called Captivated – is now available                   build a game world that aligns with the challenges of these
in visiting rooms in all Danish prisons. The game has been designed                    families.
to help troubled families to share stories about their situation (e.g. the         -   PD activities with other specialists (family therapists;
fathers’ experience of prison life or the child’s stories of their everyday            psychologist and researchers within criminology) to evaluate
lives), but also to re-construct and share memories of the past or wishes              game content and to construct feasible criteria for evaluation.
for the future. The concept of ‘family narratives’ – as a shared space
for communicating stories and experiences – plays a central role in the       Throughout the project, design game formats (Brandt & Messeter,
evaluation study and the research into how families interact with the         2004; Brandt, 2006; Eriksen et al., 2014) have been used as a method
game (see below).                                                             of inquiry to learn about the challenges of the different stakeholders,
                                                                              in particular children and fathers for whom the game is designed. Each
Participatory activities within the project                                   activity has resulted in knowledge about the people (families) and the
The game itself lends its mechanics from the board game Monopoly              prison system we are designing for and has helped us in aligning the
and takes its players on a journey through a prison with certain places,      game world with the players’ real world.
characters (groups of prisoners and staff) and situations that the players
already know – or will learn to relate to. The game consists of 20            Table 1 shows the fieldwork, co-design activities and encounters we
characters divided into five groups of prisoners and one group of prison      had with the different stakeholders throughout the design process. In
officers. A player wins the game by collecting certain characters and by      Figure 3 these activities are applied to Sanders & Stappers’ Model.
performing acts triggered by the question cards. The game has three
different types of cards: story cards (stories about the prison); actions
cards (that encourage physical interactions) and be-honest cards (that
invite deeper interpersonal communication between the players).

228                                                                                                                                                                229
                        Analysis: Identifying value and change
                        The aim of our analysis is to examine different aspects of change within
                        the project by focusing on three types of value creation:

      Table 1: Ac-
                           • Social value, defined as a qualitative change in the re-distribution
      tivities in the      of identities or interpersonal relationships. This type of value might
      project              influence the participants that we co-design with (and for) in terms of
                           how they interact with each other (and us, as a research team) – and
                           how identities are explored and tried out among the participants.
                           • Research value, defined as a qualitative change in terms of making
                           a feasible research study design. This might influence theoretical
                           foundations, hypotheses or other methodological assumptions
                           and predetermined intentions. This might lead, for instance, to a
                           rejection of a pre-accepted methodological approach – or to the
                           formation of new research questions.
                           • Demand value, defined as a qualitative change in terms of making
                           a better product or service that fits the actual needs. This will have a
                           direct impact on the actual design (as product or service) – making
                           the final design more sustainable and aligned with the actual needs
                           of the people who are going to use it and the organizations that
                           want to implement it.

                        For the sake of clarity we have singled out a limited number of activities
                        that, in our view, contributed with unforeseen changes. By drawing
                        upon our empirical material we attempt to account for how social
                        value, research value and demand value are achieved through our
                        participatory research practice.

                        Co-exploring with children
                        The aim of this workshop was to understand the dilemmas and
                        challenges of children who have a father in prison (see activity 4,
                        table 1). The workshop took place over two days spent at a center for
                        family counseling. Three children (age 14–16) attended together with
                        two family therapists (see also table 1). For this workshop a design
                        game was constructed in which the participants were encouraged to
      Figure 3.         formulate a so-called dream card– a future wish concerning their prison
      Activities        visit or relationship with their father. Furthermore, the game included
      applied to        the formulation of three barrier cards which illustrated the obstacles
      Sanders &
                        to the fulfillment of the dream. The aim of the game was to overcome
      Stappers’
      Model             the obstacles by using different fictional and self-formulated “helpers.”

                        One of the participants, the 14-year-old Mira, had a problematic
                        relationship with her incarcerated father who, she felt, was dominating
                        and demanding. On her dream card she wrote that she wished to visit
                        her father less frequently. Her barrier cards revealed three obstacles
                        to not seeing the father: a) it was too difficult for her to tell him; b)
                        her father did not understand her personal life; and c) he would be
                        disappointed with her. So, her desire to visit her father less frequently
                        was hard for her to implement in practice (Figure 4).

230                                                                                                   231
                                                                              Figure 4.      On her barrier cards she wrote that the father “is a playmate”; that he
                                                                              Design game    “does not take responsibility for his mistakes” and that it was much
                                                                              results from   easier to “blame Mum for everything that is bad.” Katrin (blue cards)
                                                                              participant
                                                                              “Mira”
                                                                                             expressed similar concerns in relation to her future wish. She wrote that
                                                                                             she wished that the father “would be honest“ and that he “would admit
                                                                                             that what he had done was stupid” (Figure 5).

                                                                                                                                                                         Figure 5:
                                                                                                                                                                         Design game
                                                                                                                                                                         results from
                                                                                                                                                                         the mothers
                                                                                                                                                                         “Tanja” (red
                                                                                                                                                                         cards) and
                                                                                                                                                                         “Katrin” (blue
                                                                                                                                                                         cards).




                                                                                             The workshop clearly showed that the mothers believed that their ex-
Originally, we assumed that the game should encourage children to                            husbands were irresponsible; that they were dishonest about the crime
visit their fathers more often. Our hypothesis was partly based upon                         they had committed and they felt their children suffered from that fact.
a report made by The Danish National Centre for Social Research that                         These results revealed a dilemma from the mothers’ perspective: that
pointed out a need for offering better-designed initiatives for children                     the fathers did not assume their parenting role. Nonetheless, it also
between the ages of 11 and 18 years (Oldrup et al., 2016, pp. 5–14).                         became clear that the mothers thought that their children should keep
However, through our design workshop with Mira and the other children                        visiting their father in prison.
we learned that children do not necessarily want to visit their fathers
more often. Instead, what is important is to improve the quality of the                      The workshop with the mothers changed our view of the actual
visits by making them more meaningful. Hence we revised the project’s                        purpose of our design. If the fathers were not capable of assuming
evaluation study by removing visit frequency as an indicator to be                           their parenting role, perhaps they were in need of a different kind of
measured. Secondly, Mira’s dream card offered a new perspective on                           game. This issue was discussed in the follow-up meetings with the
the children’s needs and what our design potentially could do for them,                      family therapists, who are also in charge of the parenting program
i.e. to make visits more meaningful by enabling the players to honestly                      of incarcerated fathers. Therefore, even though our original intention
express their emotions and needs. Based on this insight, we argue that                       was to design a single game to be played by father and child, an idea
this activity contributed with social value (enabling Mira to voice her                      began to form that we might consider creating a second game to be
wish to see her father less often); research value (revising our evaluation                  played by the fathers only. The second game could help the fathers to
indicators) and demand value (setting new guidelines for the game).                          look at things from the children’s and mothers’ perspective, increase
                                                                                             their empathetic understanding and thus motivate them to have more
Co-exploring with families                                                                   meaningful conversations with their children during in-visits.
The aim of this workshop was to understand the dilemmas of the family
as a whole (see activity 5, table 1). The workshop took place at the                         Based on this, we argue that this activity contributed with social value
same location (center for family counseling) and also lasted two days.                       by enabling the mothers to express and share, with other mothers, their
Four mothers participated together with their children, aged 14–23.                          deep concerns about how their children experienced the effects of
In all four families the father of the children was in prison and all the                    imprisonment. Moreover, it contributed with demand value in terms of
mothers were divorced from their husbands. This meant that other                             expanding our design intention to include a second game.
adults (e.g. family members or friends) accompanied the children on
their prison visit. In the workshop, the same design game as in activity                     Co-designing with incarcerated fathers
4 was activated.                                                                             The aim of this workshop was to gain knowledge of prisoners’ challenges
                                                                                             of parenting and their experiences of the family visits (see activity 6,
We will draw on the design game results from the two mothers “Tanja”                         table 1). These insights were meant to inform the game world and the
and “Katrin.” Tanja (see red cards below) wrote on her dream card that                       gameplay. The workshop took place in a prison with six imprisoned
she wished that her son would get a more realistic view of his dad.
232                                                                                                                                                                                233
fathers participating. All six men were serving long-term sentences and                       the children. One father came up with a suggestion – something he
could only see their children during in-visits (unless special permission                     wanted to do for his son’s next birthday – and he shared this idea with
was granted). We were not allowed to use video or take photos, only                           the group.
to take notes. For this session we worked with two preliminary game
concepts – a card game and a board game. We will use the card game                            A third story is about Monika and her dad Jimmy. Jimmy is divorced
activity to exemplify how value was created in this particular workshop.                      from Monika’s mother, so Monika must visit her father with the father’s
                                                                                              girlfriend. Jimmy is dating two women at the same time and they do
The goal of the card game was to collect four cards that together                             not know of each other’s existence. So, one week Monika must visit
formed a visual story of a visiting situation. Once a player collected a                      with one girlfriend and the next week with the other girlfriend. This
complete story, he had to recount what he thought was happening in                            is, of course, strange and uncomfortable for Monika. To this story
the story and reflect on that.                                                                the prisoners reacted very harshly stating that this way of parenting
                                                                                              was unacceptable. Nevertheless, the children’s narratives were very
                                                                              Figure 6. The   recognizable to them and the cartoon format served as an effective
                                                                              card game       conversation tool.
                                                                              played with
                                                                              fathers in
                                                                              prison          This workshop contributed with social value in several aspects. First,
                                                                                              the activity enabled the incarcerated fathers to express and share their
                                                                                              challenges of fathering behind bars. Secondly, the cards allowed the
                                                                                              fathers to counteract the children’s perspectives and come up with
                                                                                              alternate stories of how to navigate the parent-child relationship.
The stories were developed on the basis of the previous workshops                             Thirdly, this activity created a bond between the fathers and us (as
with prisoners’ children and thus reflected the real-world experiences                        a research team). Since we all shared our experiences of parenting
of these children. The purpose of the workshop was to have a dialogue                         with them through playing the game, we were no longer divided into
with the fathers about their challenges as incarcerated parents, to co-                       prisoners and researchers. This again influenced the pilot study (see
design game content and to learn how they viewed their children’s                             section below). Finally, this workshop added demand value in terms of
challenges.                                                                                   “thickening” stories of the father characters; expanding stories for the
                                                                                              game world and consolidating the need for fathers to have a game of
In this workshop we played several rounds with the six prisoners and we                       their own – a game that could help them share stories of fathering and
talked about the stories and the father characters that were portrayed                        help prisoners assume their parenting role.
in the game. For instance, one story in the game is about a boy called
Nick, who lives in a foster family far away from his hometown. In the                         Pilot testing the IPPA questionnaire
story Nick goes to church and talks to the pastor who is going to confirm                     With the last activity (activity 10, table 1) we will exemplify how
him (in Denmark this religious ceremony takes place at age 13–14). Nick                       research value added to changes in our evaluation. At this point we
chooses not to invite his dad for the ceremony, because his dad is a                          had developed the board game Captivated, which was to be played in
member of a criminal gang with tattoos up to his neck and Nick does                           prisons during visiting hours. A second game called Dad’s Round was
not want his friends to know this. Nick’s father gets very upset when he                      being co-designed in separate co-design workshops. This game was to
learns that he has not been invited to the confirmation.                                      be activated in the parenting program of the prisons.

The story was discussed in the group, and the prisoners expressed                             In the process of evaluating Captivated we attempted to set baseline
responses similar to the father character in the game. For instance,                          by evaluating the existing bond between parent and child in terms
one prisoner (who was also heavily tattooed) said that he would be                            of attachment. For this purpose we chose to use a psychometric
disappointed if he was not allowed to attend his son’s confirmation and                       evaluation instrument, the so-called Inventory of Parental and Peer
that he would probably react the same way as Nick’s father.                                   Attachment (IPPA) as an evaluation tool. This tool evaluates whether
                                                                                              children and adolescents feel attachment security in relation to their
A second story concerned a well-known problem for many fathers                                parents (see Armsden and Greenberg 1987). Our hypothesis was that
during imprisonment: giving presents to their children. In this story Rosa                    the game would help children to increase their feeling of attachment,
Clara’s dad gives her a present appropriate for a little girl. For her 15th                   for instance, by enabling them to express emotions and to be honest
birthday she wants a mobile phone or a ticket to a concert, but she gets                      with their fathers. At the same time a flipped version of the IPPA was
a Barbie doll. This story triggered other stories among the prisoners,                        developed to probe the attachment from the perspective of prisoner
stories about how to handle birthdays and other important days for                            fathers.
234                                                                                                                                                                      235
The IPPA questionnaire was pilot-tested by a small group of prisoners                       every aspect of the research process. Patrick reminded us that care is
and their children. The participants were both prisoners who were                           also about how we as researchers collaborate with participants. As a
familiar with the game through previous workshops, and prisoners who                        psychometric measuring instrument, the IPPA is a way of researching
were unfamiliar with the game. The test indicated that the prisoners                        the social aspects in cases where subjects are kept at a distance. Family
did not want to complete the questionnaire. One of the prisoners,                           ties are of an intimate nature, and delving into this area requires a cross-
“Patrick”, whom we knew from previous workshops, scratched out and                          pollination of research and caring practices. Even though it was planned
withdraw his consent form (see fig 7). Further, a prison officer told us                    according to our funding application, we realized that the IPPA did not
that the inmates she had talked with also thought of the questions in                       align with such a practice.
the IPPA as “strange.” We got permission to make a follow-up phone
interview with Patrick to ask him about the questionnaire. Patrick told                     Social value was achieved through other encounters. Another prisoner
us that some of the questions were too painful, but he also added that                      “Lars,” who participated in both the co-design process and the pilot
if we had asked him the same questions in a personal conversation, he                       test of the game, contacted us after the pilot test. He had been moved
might have been willing to answer them.                                                     to another prison and he asked if he could have his own game. Today,
                                                                                            he and his two children have a “private” version of the game that they
Based on our conversation with Patrick we removed the questions that                        play during visiting hours.
he identified as being intimidating and simplified the questionnaire. It
was then distributed to 550 prisoners in two Danish prisons. Within a                       Discussion
period of 2 months we received 3 completed questionnaires.                                  In Figure 8 we have applied both design processes to Sanders &
This experience resulted in a complete redesign of our evaluation                           Stappers’ Model. The figure illustrates how the explorative processes led
study. We decided to take a qualitative ethnographic approach and                           to an extension of our design intention and activated a split co-design
interview prisoners and their families in person. We also replaced                          process towards the implementation of the two games – Captivated
attachment theory with theories of family narratives and we decided to                      to be played by families during visiting hours and Dad’s Round to be
use the game actively as a prompt for the interviews. Our aim was to                        played in parenting courses under the supervision of family therapists.
understand what kind of narratives and playful interactions the game
activated and how families shared stories.                                                                                                                                 Figure 8.
                                                                                                                                                                           Sanders &
                                                                           Figure 7. The                                                                                   Stappers’
                                                                           scratched out                                                                                   Model
                                                                           IPPA ques-                                                                                      applied to
                                                                           tionnaire from                                                                                  both design
                                                                           the prisoner                                                                                    processes:
                                                                           “Patric”                                                                                        Top: Game A,
                                                                                                                                                                           “Captivated”
                                                                                                                                                                           Below: Game
                                                                                                                                                                           B, “Dad’s
                                                                                                                                                                           Round”.




                                                                                            By turning Sanders & Stappers’ model 90 degrees and by adding
                                                                                            the changes we have outlined through the four activities, we are
                                                                                            able to visualize the changes that a project may activate through the
                                                                                            participatory involvement (see model, figure 9). These changes can
                                                                                            be conceptualized as ripples that might impact other interactions. The
                                                                                            model aims at capturing the difference between what a project aims
                                                                                            at changing and evaluating (the straight line) and all the ripple effects
                                                                                            (circles around the straight line) that may occur.
Our interaction with Patrick and other prisoners contributed with
research value in the sense of redirecting our research approach towards                    Note that the activities we have outlined are just glimpses into the
the participatory and social approach we started out with. It became                        many interactions that we conducted with participants throughout the
clear to us that social design, as a caring practice, had to be part of
236                                                                                                                                                                                237
                                                                               Figure 9. The    References
                                                                               Ripple Effect
                                                                               Model (left).    Arditti, J. A., Lambert-Shute, J., & Joest, K. (2003). Saturday morning at the jail:
                                                                               The model        Implications of incarceration for families and children. Family relations, 52(3), 195-204.
                                                                               applied to
                                                                                                Armstrong, L., Bailey, J., Julier, G., & Kimbell, L. (2014). Social Design Futures: HEI
                                                                               the activities
                                                                                                Research and the AHRC.
                                                                               (right)
                                                                                                Brandt, E., & Messeter, J. (2004). Facilitating collaboration through design games.
                                                                                                In Proceedings of the eighth conference on Participatory Design: Artful integration:
                                                                                                interweaving media, materials and practices-Volume 1 (pp. 121-131). ACM.
                                                                                                Brandt, E. (2006, August). Designing exploratory design games: a framework for
                                                                                                participation in participatory design?. In Proceedings of the ninth conference on
                                                                                                Participatory Design: Expanding boundaries in design – Volume 1 (pp. 57-66). ACM.
                                                                                                Brandt, E., Binder, T., & Sanders, E. B. N. (2012). Tools and techniques: ways to engage
                                                                                                telling, making and enacting. In Routledge international handbook of participatory
                                                                                                design (pp. 165-201). Routledge.
                                                                                                Björgvinsson, E., Ehn, P., & Hillgren, P. A. (2010). Participatory design and democratizing
                                                                                                innovation. In Proceedings of the 11th Biennial participatory design conference (pp.
project. Yet, the Ripple Effects Model illustrates that the values that                         41-50). ACM.
were achieved had a huge impact on the entire project. Mira’s and                               Eriksen, M. A., Brandt, E., Mattelmäki, T., & Vaajakallio, K. (2014, October). Taking design
Patrick’s involvement affected our methodological approach and the                              games seriously: re-connecting situated power relations of people and materials. In
IPPA failure led to a complete change in the evaluation study and the                           Proceedings of the 13th Participatory Design Conference: Research Papers-Volume 1
theoretical foundations. The participatory activities with the families and                     (pp. 101-110). ACM.
the family therapists influenced our design intention as it highlighted                         Hairston, C. F. (1998). The forgotten parent: Understanding the forces that influence
a demand for a second prototype targeting parenting in prison. Our                              incarcerated fathers’ relationships with their children. Child welfare, 77(5), 617.
method of inquiry, the game design format, enabled playful forms of                             Holt, N., & Miller, D. (1972). Explorations in inmate-family relationships. Sacramento,
                                                                                                CA: Research Division, California Department of Corrections.
participation and enhanced the interpersonal relationships between
participants and the research team, which again has strengthened our                            Iversen, O. S., & Dindler, C. (2014). Sustaining participatory design initiatives. CoDesign,
                                                                                                10(3-4), 153-170.
future collaboration with the prison staff, the therapists, the prisoners
and the families involved.                                                                      Kelly, G., Mulgan, G., & Muers, S. (2002). Creating Public Value: An analytical framework
                                                                                                for public service reform. London: Strategy Unit, Cabinet Office.

Conclusions                                                                                     Knutz, E., Lenskjold, T. U., & Markussen, T. (2016). Fiction as a resource in participatory
                                                                                                design. In Proceedings of Design Design Research Society, 1830-1844.
With our Ripple Effect Model, we propose that the full understanding of
change in social design projects relies on an inquiry into how participation                    Knutz, E., Markussen, T., & Lenskjold, T. (2019). Navigating Care in Social Design: A
                                                                                                provisional model. In Proceedings of the 8th Nordes Conference. Helsinki: Aalto
might impact design, implementation and evaluation. Ripple effects                              University
are those unplanned changes that may not be foregrounded in the
                                                                                                Knutz, E., Markussen, T., Visch, V., Tan, E.S.H (forthcoming). Small stories behind
evaluation study design, but which nevertheless hold a potential value.                         bars – towards a multi-level framework for studying family narratives in Social Design.
We have distinguished between three basic values: social, demand and                            Interdisciplinary Journal of Language, Discourse & Communication Studies.
research values. These values are not in any way fixed, constant and                            Lösel, F., & Farrington, D. P. (2012). Direct protective and buffering protective factors
objective but depend on a view of who initiates, directs and benefits                           in the development of youth violence. American journal of preventive medicine, 43(2),
from the participation (cf. Vines et al., 2013). By scrutinizing the values                     S8-S23.
of our social design case we identified a range of unforeseen changes                           Markson, L., Lösel, F., Souza, K., & Lanskey, C. (2015). Male prisoners’ family relationships
that have affected the final design outcome, the implementation of the                          and resilience in resettlement. Criminology & Criminal Justice, 15(4), 423-441
design, the evaluation study as well as our interpersonal relations with                        Markussen, T. & Knutz, E. (forthcoming). Board games as a new method for studying
participants and stakeholders in the project.                                                   troubled family narratives: framing counter-narratives in social design research. In K.
                                                                                                Lueg (ed.) Routledge Handbook of Counter-Narratives.
                                                                                                Markussen, T. (2017). Disentangling ‘the social’in social design’s engagement with the
                                                                                                public realm. CoDesign, 13(3), 160-174.
                                                                                                Mulgan, G. (2006). The process of social innovation. Innovations: technology,
                                                                                                governance, globalization, 1(2), 145-162.
                                                                                                Mulgan, G. (2010). Measuring social value. Stanford Social Innovation Review 8(3): 38-
                                                                                                43.

238                                                                                                                                                                                             239
Mulgan, G. (2014). Design in public and social innovation–what works, and what could
work better: Nesta.
Mumford, M. D. (2002). Social innovation: ten cases from Benjamin Franklin. Creativity
research journal, 14(2), 253-266.
Oldrup, H., Frederiksen, S., Henze-Pedersen, S., Olsen, R.F., 2016. Indsat far udsat barn.
SFI – Det nationale forskningscenter for velfærd, København.
Preskill, H., & Beer, T. (2012). Evaluating social innovation. Center for Evaluation
Innovation. Retrieved from: https://www.evaluationinnovation.org/publication/
evaluating-social-innovation/
Smith, R. C., & Iversen, O. S. (2018). Participatory design for sustainable social change.
Design Studies, 59, 9-36.
Sanders, E. B. N., & Stappers, P. J. (2014). Probes, toolkits and prototypes: three
approaches to making in codesigning. CoDesign, 10(1), 5-14.
Sanders, E. B. N., & Stappers, P. J. (2008). Co-creation and the new landscapes of
design. Co-design, 4(1), 5-18.
Sleeswijk Visser, F., Stappers, P. J., van der Lugt, R., & Sanders, E. B. N. (2007). Context
mapping: a hands-on introduction. Context and Conceptualization reader, 25-50.
Thorpe, A., & Gamman, L. (2011). Design with society: why socially responsive design is
good enough. CoDesign, 7(3-4), 217-230.
Vines, J., Clarke, R., Wright, P., McCarthy, J., & Olivier, P. (2013, April). Configuring
participation: on how we involve people in design. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (pp. 429-438). ACM.
Vines, J., Clarke, R., Light, A., & Wright, P. (2015). The beginnings, middles and endings
of participatory research in HCI: An introduction to the special issue on ‘perspectives on
participation’. International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 74, 77-80.




240                                                                                            241
      Redesigning design
       for culture change:
             Theory in the
            Anthropocene
                      Ann Light
242                          243
Abstract                                                                      rather than empirically tested. Nonetheless, it is timely to borrow from
Design is low on theory of transformation, which becomes problematic          this legacy of analytic thinking since making change in culture has never
as the practices and outputs of design need to contribute to a culture        been more important.
of planetary adaptation for sustainability. In fact, design itself needs to
be (re)designed to enact culture change. To make these shifts, design         Democratising futures
research can learn from cultural theory that positions culture as evolving    My branch of design practice could be described as constructing
and performative. Adopting these ideas helps to reveal the designed-          possible futures in a collaborative way, drawing on a particular branch
therefore-designable nature of the world, which is a necessary                of participatory design (Binder et al 2015). ‘Democratic participatory
prelude to mobilizing publics. The paper concludes with participatory         design practices’ (Light 2015) is used here to mean practices that
collaborative thought experiments, influenced by cultural theory, that        knowingly address cultural relations by collaboratively exploring,
offer directions for changing design.                                         critiquing and designing tools, structures and systems, hoping,
                                                                              collectively, to change how lives are lived and enhance them. We see
Introduction                                                                  this kind of work in Ehn et al’s book on Making Futures (2014), research
The discipline of design, despite its basis in transformation, is still       on how older people might want to shape future life, Democratising
developing its theories of change. Although this has progressed as            Technology (Light et al 2009, 2011b) and Candy’s Things from the
design research becomes a distinct domain, there is a tendency within         Future        (http://situationlab.org/project/the-thing-from-the-future/).
design disciplines to consider fit-for-purpose in researching individual      Wilde and Anderson (2013) address ‘a future fundamentally different
designs, rather than reflecting on that purpose and its social impact.        from what we know’ with embodied-thinking-through-making. RMIT’s
Dilnot suggests that design is historically resistant to theory: ‘it finds    Design+Ethnography+Futures asked what uncertainty means (Akama
its glory in [...its] unswerving application of design to practical ends,     et al 2018). Across these investigatory projects is recognition of the
mediated by criticism, but (often) only in minor ways by self-reflection.’    politics to futures in the present, and ethics to one’s methodology
(2017). Kimbell, in rethinking design, argues for an approach that            for impacting them, which are often omitted from mainstream design
‘moves away from a disembodied, ahistorical design thinking to a              discourse. These examples are far from alone.
situated, contingent set of practices…, which recognizes the materiality
of designed things and the material and discursive practices through          My particular concern is for more-than-just-human collective futures
which they come to matter.’ (2012, p129).                                     and how people engage in considering them. Futurists and technology
                                                                              companies, policy makers and politicians all formally address futures
When design research considers deliberate socio-material change               through their actions (often without public mandate). But it is not part of
(the “social turn”), silence on how design matters becomes noticeably         education or working life for most of us. For many people, the world is a
problematic. We must understand change across many social, economic           given and they do not, as most designers do, see it as raw material for a
and political dimensions to enable us to develop and choose between           new iteration. As predictions for the planet’s future darken, it becomes
alternatives for society. Changing cultures towards sustainable living        an ethical and practical matter to promote discussion of futures to
is a case in point. This focuses effort on the knowledge needed for           include everyone sharing the concern and collective responsibility,
making cultures as well as understandings of individual behaviour and         even if they have little practice in considering alternatives. It is ethical
any materials we use to effect change in it.                                  because we share the outcome. It is practical because, by learning
                                                                              about alternatives and how to reach them, we become better able to
In this paper, I explore these points in considering how to democratize       innovate, change and avert catastrophe.
futures as the need grows to ask what futures are possible with climate
emergency (e.g. Wallace-Wells, 2019). I argue that understanding              Design’s dangerous developments
design as a democratic principle changes the conversation, as does            My ambitions to reorient design stem from concern about its power.
the resulting obligation to equip people with a sense of the ‘designed,       This work becomes more urgent as the magnitude of the industrialized
therefore designable’ (Light 2011a) nature of our world. If recognition       world’s impact on life is revealed. The Global North is responsible for
of this era as the Anthropocene can do any good, it must move beyond          most of the planet’s energy misuse. Yet, much design work continues
understanding that human activity impacts life on Earth, to offer some        with little thought to where it will lead. Even people consumed with
collective insight into how this happens and what to do to tackle climate     worry about unsustainable futures go to work and contribute to that
inertia.                                                                      unsustainability. As Kimbell describes (2012), their agency is not a
                                                                              match for the wider material and discursive practices of designing.
To ground this paper, I draw from cultural theory. Design favours             Incremental changes in the fabric of an upgrade are hailed as a major
empirical testing. The commitments of cultural theory are discursive,         breakthrough, but the upgrading goes on. Most designing takes place

244                                                                                                                                                          245
in a market where an immediate competitive edge is more important            Theory of change
than long-term impacts, blinkered to serve a segmented production line       An obvious source of theory to support design’s social turn comes from
and a growth agenda that is looking increasingly absurd. Design may          social science, particularly social psychology. This has not strengthened
help configure the future, but practices on the ground are frequently        a more democratized approach. For instance, there has been growing
indifferent to this.                                                         interest, in policy circles, in behavioural insights and nudge psychology
                                                                             (John 2018).
Papanek famously spoke against manufactured products that were
unsafe, showy, maladapted, or essentially useless (1971/1985)                Nudge is the opposite of helping people understand the designed-
exemplifying the design researcher interested in changing the                therefore-designable nature of the world. It points design towards a
discipline. More recently, discussion about how design should change         top-down, all-knowing approach perpetrated on the masses. It is
has gained new foci. In 2005, Sterling commented that: ‘What we              ‘bovine design’, reducing, rather than enhancing, our critical faculties
really ought to fear is not “Oblivion” but irretrievable decline.’ (2005,    when we all need to be consciously reorienting the world towards new
p141). He advocated greater technological innovation as an antidote to       realities (Light et al, 2017). And nudge policies fail to appreciate their
fatalistic handwringing (p13). Elsewhere, anthropologists and biologists     own social and political dynamics, including the state’s own political-
entering design conversations argue that solutions can be the problem.       economic strategy (Leggett 2014). Yet, it is easy for even enlightened
Advocating Staying with the Trouble (2016), a new generation of              design policy to halt at this point.
design researchers is bringing the work of Haraway (2016), Barad (2007)
and other feminist thinkers into design research as a foundation for         By contrast, descriptive domains, such anthropology, are increasingly
relations. Puig de la Bellacasa’s ethical treatise on care and soil has      exploring design as a method of collaborative engagement for world-
gone viral (2017). These works point to the complexity of the systems        making, and not just a field of study (e.g. Ingold 2013, Escobar 2018).
underpinning symbiosis and the need for new ways of being together.          How does this support a more participative agenda?
In gentle fashion, they inform how to live together rather than how to
engineer the planet.                                                         Towards humanities?
                                                                             Design research starts by understanding phenomena, not a theoretical
A social turn                                                                position (although theory may be sought in sense-making). The world-
With these tensions pointing to a role for design to redesign itself,        making processes described by Ingold and Escobar come from a
design research has been proposing new relations with society. Fuad-         humanistic tradition. This is not always seen as useful.
Luke observes the terms circulating: ‘social design’, ‘designing society’,
‘design for society, socially responsible design, socially responsive        Nonetheless, the humanities explicitly articulate theories of change,
design, and design for social innovation’ (2015). Design as societal         serving to put activity in context and eventually to change what
transformation appears in a number of movements, e.g. Sangiorgi              discourses are ripe and how the world understands itself. A vision of
(2011) and Cottam (2018) on transformation design. Such movements            ontological change – crudely, where we change what we are to change
are part of broader expansion of the designer’s role in society (Maze        what we do – appears in different ways across different traditions, such
2014). All implicitly include culture change, some involving more            as the political economy of enchantment (Bennett 2001). Adopting
systematic analysis, such as system-orientated design (Sevaldson, 2013)      theories of change of these kinds, we move from the craft skills of
and transition design (Kossoff et al 2015).                                  making change to designing education about change.

Significantly, some practices include working with publics to understand     Humanities contribute to (interaction) design research, through ‘the
together how design can transform contexts and relations. With               central role of critical interpretation in humanistic thought …toward
others, design knowledge and skills sit with trained designers. This         the development, clarification, and justification of concepts’ and the
raises a distinction in how design is mobilized. While it has long been      material of social change (e.g. feminism, Marxist studies) (Bardzell and
asserted that everyone designs (Cross 2001, Manzini 2015), how is this       Bardzell 2015:17-8). Not only is this what mainstream design is missing,
understood? Can we mobilize design as a means to transform society,          it considers what knowledge we are interested in making and, by
not only as a series of processes, but as a way of understanding society     considering epistemology, speaks about the opportunities and gaps
as designable and, with this, offer increased sense of agency? Giving        we observe.
access to design necessarily changes design.
                                                                             Designing our development
                                                                             Taking this on, we can find work that speaks to design, not in terms of
                                                                             the next product, but its direction of travel.

246                                                                                                                                                       247
Birth of design?                                                                   ‘A condition brought about at a certain time can be abolished
Philosophical literature supports a suggestion that design is integral            at some other time. …it might seem that natural condition is
to how humans develop. In Stiegler’s (1998) expansion of Heidegger’s              beyond the possibility of change. In truth, however, the nature
phenomenology, we find a claim that technics (‘the organisation                   of things is no more immutably given, once and for all, than is
of inorganic matter’) is a process of externalisation made possible               historical reality.’ (de Beauvoir, 1972/1949).
through language, technique, and culture that allows us to capture
and share our existence—or the ‘pursuit of life by means other than            We can regard ourselves as mutable, where identity is inscribed in
life’ (1998). Through the act of organizing, we are able to constitute         society’s constant rehearsal of behaviours (Butler 1990). Performativity
the world, while these acts of organization fasten interpretations upon        presents identity as enacted: ‘One is not simply a body, but, in some very
matter and thought. Although Stiegler does not focus on the creative           key sense, one does one’s body.’ (1990:272). The design of the systems
experimentation needed to arrive at organization, ‘the organisation of         round us inscribes us. There are other theories of how technology and
inorganic matter’ is inevitably a creative and collaborative process.          identity are interrelated, how values are shaped by what we become
                                                                               as well as what we choose (e.g. Verbeek 2016; Pinch et al 1985/1999;
Stiegler suggests that: ‘it is the tool, that is tehknē, that invents the      MacKenzie and Wajcman 1999).
human, not the human who invents the technical. Or again: the human
invents himself in the technical by inventing the tool – by becoming           For me, Butler’s insights help consider the way that interactions with
exteriorized techno-logically’ (1998:141). Although this is a form of          technology inscribe, prescribe and proscribe what we can become
technological determinism, it raises questions about how designing             (2011a), but they also move me, through this reflection, to consider a
comes to be and about whether this opportunity to organize is, in any          more flexible version of the material world. Not only does performativity
way, equally distributed or democratic in our current world. If it is a        focus on how society is formed, but a non-essentialist view of identity
fundamental part of our constitution, why is it not a right for all? If this   releases us from contemplating patterns of societal behaviour as fixed
doing is so central to our being, what kind of designing (and making) is       and immovable.
fit for a world with fewer resources?
                                                                               Design can speed up these reconsiderations by targeting how agency
The distribution of this power and the results of this organization are        is conceived and by embracing flexibility instead of aspiring to end-
demonstrably political. Bowker and Star (2000) poignantly describe             states (Light 2011a). A sense of agency (or the ability to enact change)
how categorization systems form identities for groups through                  is related to this. And this is at the heart of my designed-therefore-
increasing bureaucratization and definitions like apartheid. Types of          designable ambitions. Agency, our power to do, is core to identity in
design configure who we are and what we can become. We become                  change: how far (we believe) we choose our actions and are able to
committed to infrastructures – from canals, sewers and roads to internet       enact change relates to who we think we are. Performativity may show
provision and 5G.                                                              how challenging it is for individuals to change what they are inscribed
                                                                               to be, yet it is also clear about the social nature of identity and its
Data, with their hierarchies and identity definitions, meets information       potential for change, how ‘to remain un-centred and open to new
technologies, with their binary coding and hard-wiring. This alters the        influences’ (Light 2011a). Performativity is a liberating philosophy, then,
flexibility and balance of control in societies. If rigid systems converge,    because it allows for things to be done differently: it is concerned with
we not only design ourselves, as Willis (2006) suggests, but we design         enactment and how conditions affect enactment and produce ways
out the potential to redesign ourselves.                                       of doing. ‘When we ask after the conditions of social change, we are
                                                                               asking both about the preconditions for transformation and about how
Identities in flux                                                             encounters encourage us to think and feel and act, not just individually
It would be too deterministic to say that we are human because we              but collectively.’ (Barnett and DeLuca 2019).
make. On the other hand, if we accept the ontological potential implicit
in culture change, we can see both designing and identity as fluid and         The performative turn in cultural theory can be seen as the correlate
we can start to speculate on some interesting potential intersections.         of the social turn in design, offering a more integrated approach to
Every interaction changes how things are. Everything is designable.            understanding how we constitute our world. ‘Such a perspective has
Greater awareness of how things are designable enables us to be more           been extended to show how not only gender, but the materiality of
reflective about how and what is designed. We can embrace a historical         things […] or even the man/machine distinction […] are not given a
perspective:                                                                   priori, but are ceaselessly produced in social performances in which
                                                                               their reproduction is not routine or matter of fact’ (Licoppe 2010).



248                                                                                                                                                          249
Given these insights, there is no final arrival point, but context, an
absence of dogma and a mutability that allows new truths, perspectives             and how the world could be joined up for greater information,
and engagements to emerge through a refusal to accept definition.                  understanding and feedback, people come together to discuss
Designs may be completed, but identity is always in flux. Adopting                 utopias, resistance and tools of change and make manuals for
this stance allows a more fluid response to technological changes,                 coordinating world resources (Light et al 2015).
methodological commitments and the possible domains to be touched                  • On some other world
by designing. It means the nature of our encounters together is not only           Demonstrating the way that the world has come about by looking
ethically significant; it is constitutive of our relations.                        at an alternative present with different path dependencies and
                                                                                   outcomes, this shows how the world could have been different and
Exploring activist futures with this possibility in mind can modify how            therefore still could be (Korsmeyer and Light 2019).
we stage our encounters to consider the designed nature of the                     • Worlds of/that matter
world. It is a reflexive act. Following this logic, we design something            Working with the affective, this workshop explores how we come to
new on multiple levels when we set up democratic participatory                     care for the things we value and how we might include more that is
work in contexts for co-research and engagement. We do not just                    fragile in our care.
share practice and reveal the nature of our interactions, but make
new ones possible. These ways of being might never occur in other               New worlds for new cultures
circumstances, so there may be no possible other way to perceive the            The challenge for participants in the on some other world workshop is
potential revealed (Light 2015). In other words, these practices form the       to co-create an alternative present based on stimuli given as briefs at
basis of a new constitutive anthropology (ibid). They are a creative form       the start of the session. After introducing the need for new practices
of engagement, enacting cultural research through making situations             and the lack of need for accurate history, the Counter-Factual Worlds
for sharing, learning and changing. And they are ‘constitutive’ in the full     Generator (Figure 1) pumps out five globes, randomly assigned to small
sense of bringing into being. Democratic participatory design fosters           groups. Inside this globe is a description of a world that is not ours but
new social arrangements, providing the means for new ways of being              bears a relation to ours. One crucial aspect is different. Each group is
together to be born, reflected upon, interpreted, understood and                then invited to work through a process involving:
supported. Performativity provides theory to show how and why these
changes come into being through particular forms of design, while also             1. Worlding: discuss this world, how it works and what the present
providing a method for these enactments. It allows us to do more than                 would be like if this world were ours;
go through motions, but to change ourselves and our futures through                2. Chronicling: record the key features of this world in a story for
coming together and exploring.                                                        sharing, then tell this to the other groups;
                                                                                   3. Creating: make a thing/system/service that reflects (the values of)
Some examples                                                                         this world, with the materials provided (glue, scissors, pens, etc);
This essay has stayed at a theoretical level, discussing theory of change.
This section briefly details a single kind of practice that has resulted from                                                                                Figure 1. the
considering performativity as a theory of change and the designed-                                                                                           Counter-fac-
therefore-designable nature of the world with members of the public. Its                                                                                     tual Worlds
                                                                                                                                                             Generator,
design is influenced by these philosophical considerations and shaped
                                                                                                                                                             with globes
by a desire to change culture towards democratized fellow-journeying                                                                                         (photo credit:
in increasingly uncertain futures. This is guided by theory that reveals                                                                                     Deborah
the non-essential, enacted and ever-evolving nature of our relations.                                                                                        Mason)

Three worlds for transformation
I have three workshops in circulation framed as process tools and
designed to help people come together and understand themselves
as agents in collaborative change. I will discuss one in more detail to
show its operation, but I introduce them first as a way of highlighting
three dimensions:

•      World machines
      Revealing the power of the digital to connect, sense and aggregate

250                                                                                                                                                                    251
      4. Analyzing: reflect on this world and its outcomes (artifacts and/or                   design to be participative, inclusive and focused on new futures that do
      ways-of-being) to consider:                                                              not start from our blinkered world of squandered resources and endless
                                                                                               upgrades. If we have, in design research, a sense of cultural dynamics
       •   how values affect the design;                                                       and the political will to democratize design, we can apply performative
       •   how this relates to our world(s);                                                   theory to make sense of this – both people’s desire to lead creative
       •   what the process of imagining another world has revealed.                           and fulfilling lives and the options to morph into new arrangements
                                                                                               that such enthusiasm gives us. It points towards creative practices that
The workshop ends with sharing and contrasting of outcomes and a                               designers can enable and people can engage in, which enable new
whole-group discussion of learning across cultural and socio-material                          selves to be created.
dimensions.
                                                                                               If we wholeheartedly adopt the creed that we become what we do,
Inside the globes, a short provocation spurs the participants to                               then the encounters in these workshops, and others like them, concern
speculate on another world (e.g. Box 1). There is no other brief, but a                        possibilities that are not to be observed however long we watch people
                                                                               Box 1: sample
chance to create.                                                                              going about their business during extended fieldwork. They are not to
                                                                               of a counter-
                                                                               factual world   be observed in inviting participants to help us co-design products. The
      The Brazilian Rubber Monopoly persists…                                  provocation     special characteristic here is that we are collaboratively assembling the
      In 1876, Henry Wickham, on a mission from the Royal Botanical                            components of how to be together. When we engage in democratic
      Gardens, brought seeds of the rubber tree from Brazil to the                             participatory design practices, we are co-designing ways of being, as
      UK. At the time, Brazil held a monopoly on rubber, making                                well as staging encounters to learn about ways of being. It is a form of
      the rubber barons very rich. Both the British government and                             research through design where the product for iteration is a process.
      the American car manufacturer Henry Ford could see that the                              We literally make our futures by the practice of performing them
      high cost of rubber was a barrier to the expansion of the motor                          and to design for this opportunity offers a profoundly important and
      vehicle industry – and anything else that required pneumatic                             meaningful future for design, despite its dangers.
      tyres as well as a number of other manufacturing and industrial
      processes. Ford set up his own colony in Brazil in an attempt to                         Conclusions
      produce cheap rubber. The British moved the rubber plantations                           It is, in the end, unimportant how ideas come to inform design and
      to Asia where the Empire could set up rubber trees in a way                              from where they are drawn; the pragmatics of our situation merely
      that made rubber harvesting efficient and economical. By the                             require that change comes, both in what is designed and what design
      1910s, the monopoly was broken and rubber was available more                             is understood to be. I have argued that performative theories of change
      cheaply from British Empire sources.                                                     support the instantiation of new ways of being and save designing from
                                                                                               its damaging legacy and a loss of relevance as natural resources become
      This counter-factual world imagines that the monopoly had not                            increasingly difficult and/or dangerous to use. I have given a simple
      been broken and Brazil had kept control of the whole rubber                              example of a new kind of practice, at once generative and modest in
      market. Rubber remains expensive.                                                        how it brings people together. I have shown how this relates to the
                                                                                               critical activity of encouraging a sense of agency by acknowledging the
                                                                                               designed-therefore-designable nature of the world.
A new role for design
Over the last years, this scenario has been used to think through how                          At present, such reflections do not sit adequately in design, for it
materials, transport, political geography, colonialism, and commerce                           is still seen as operating in ‘a close-present: the present of a recent
affect what happens in our world. It has pointed to alternative futures                        yesterday, limited now and almost tomorrow’ (Anusas and Harkness
and, with the other workshops in the series, given a sense of what an                          2014) and this cannot be the basis of tackling the Anthropocene.
alternative world might offer. It has been incorporated into further                           Perhaps, in borrowing some theory, we can return a renewed sense of
engagement processes to contribute to a shift in thinking. By itself, such                     timeliness and importance for disciplines beyond our own. Certainly,
speculation is merely like a game, but in combination with other tools it                      we can engage in collaborative ‘what if’ speculation that gives those
has the potential to lead to transformative creative practice (Light et al                     without the comfort of professional future-making the opportunity of
2018, Light et al 2019).                                                                       redesigning design for a turbulent period when material consumption

But it is not presented here as a method or a discussion of speculation.
It is offered to show the kind of tool that can be created if we redesign

252                                                                                                                                                                        253
and traditional characteristics of design no longer serve.                                  Light, A. and Korsmeyer, H. (2019) Learning to Anticipate Worlds through Participatory
                                                                                            Speculative Design, Anticipation Conference 19
References
                                                                                            Light, A., Mason, D., Wakeford, T. Wolstenholme, R. and Hielscher, S. (2018) Creative
                                                                                            Practice and Transformations to Sustainability: Making and Managing Culture Change.
Anusas, M. and Harkness, R. (2014) “Things Could Be Different”: Design Anthropology
                                                                                            Arts and Humanities Research Council.
as Hopeful, Critical, Ecological. Research Network for Design Anthropology:
Ethnographies of the Possible. Aarhus.                                                      Light, A., Simpson, G. and Weaver, L., Healey, P.G. (2009) Geezers, Turbines, Fantasy
                                                                                            Personas: Making the Everyday into the Future. C&C’09.
Bardzell, J. and Bardzell, S. (2015) Humanistic HCI: Synthesis Lectures on Human-
Centered Informatics. Morgan and Claypool                                                   Light, A., Wolstenholme, R. and Twist, B. (2019) Creative Practice and Transformations
                                                                                            to Sustainability: Insights for Research. Sussex Sustainability Research Programme
Barnett, J. T. and DeLuca, K. M. (2019) Introduction to The conditions that form us:
                                                                                            Working Paper#1, University of Sussex.
media, affect, social change. Culture, Theory and Critique 60(2):99–106
                                                                                            MacKenzie, D. and Wajcman, J. (1999) The Social Shaping of Technology (2nd ed.).
Bennett, Jane. 2001. The Enchantment of Modern Life: Attachments, Crossings,
                                                                                            Open University Press.
Aesthetics. Princeton University Press.
                                                                                            Manzini, E. (2015) Design, When Everybody Designs: An Introduction to Design for
Binder, T., Brandt, E., Ehn, P. and Halse, J. (2015) Democratic design experiments:
                                                                                            Social Innovation. MIT Press.
between parliament and laboratory, CoDesign 11(3-4):152-165
                                                                                            Mazé, R. (2014) Our Common Future? Political Questions for Designing Social
Bowker, G. and Star, S.L. (2000) Sorting Things Out: Classification and Its Consequences.
                                                                                            Innovation, Design Research Society Conference.
MIT Press.
                                                                                            Papanek, V.J. (1985) Design for the real world: human ecology and social change (2nd
Butler, J.P. (1990) Gender Trouble: Feminism and the Subversion of Identity. Routledge.
                                                                                            edn). Academy.
Cottam, H. (2018) Radical Help: How We Can Remake the Relationships Between Us &
                                                                                            Pinch, T. and Kline, R. (1985/1999) The Social Construction of Technology. (eds)
Revolutionise the Welfare State. Virago.
                                                                                            MacKenzie, D. and Wajcman, J. The Social Shaping of Technology. Open University
Cross, N. (2001) Designerly Ways of Knowing: Design Discipline Versus Design Science,       Press:113–115
Design Issues, 17(3):49–55
                                                                                            Pink, S., Akama, Y. Sumartojo, S. (2018) Uncertainty and Possibility: New Approaches to
de Beauvoir, S., (1972/1949) The Second Sex, (transl.) H.M. Parshley. Penguin, London.      Future Making in Design Anthropology. Bloomsbury.
Dilnot, C. (2017) Design, knowledge and human interest, DPP, 15(2):145-163                  Puig de la Bellacasa, M. (2017). Matters of Care: Speculative Ethics in More Than Human
                                                                                            Worlds. University of Minnesota Press.
Ehn, P., Nilsson, E.N. and Topgaard, R. (2014) Making Futures: Marginal Notes on
Innovation, Design, and Democracy. MIT Press                                                Sangiorgi, D. (2011) Transformative Services and Transformation Design. Int. J. Design,
                                                                                            5(2):29-40.
Escobar, A. (2018) Designs for the Pluriverse: Radical Interdependence, Autonomy, and
the Making of Worlds. Duke University Press                                                 Sevaldson, B. (2013). Systems Oriented Design: The emergence and development of
                                                                                            a designerly approach to address complexity. 2nd International Conference for Design
Espinoza, T. (2013) The Technical Object of Psychoanalysis. Stiegler and Technics, (eds)
                                                                                            Education Researchers.
Christina Howell and Gerald Moore. Edinburgh University Press:151-64
                                                                                            Sterling, B. (2005). Making Things. MIT Press
Fuad-Luke, A. (2015) Design activism ’s teleological freedoms as a means to transform
our habitus. Agents of Alternatives – Re-designing Our Realities. AoA Berlin                Stiegler, B. (1998). Technics and Time, 1: The Fault of Epimethus. (transl.) Richard
                                                                                            Beardsworth and George Collins. Stanford University Press.
Haraway, D. J. (2016). Staying with the Trouble: Making Kin in the Chthulucene. Duke
University Press.                                                                           Verbeek, P-P. (2016) Toward a Theory of Technological Mediation: A Program for
                                                                                            Postphenomenological Research. (eds) J.K. Berg O. Friis and Robert C. Crease,
Ingold, T. (2013). Making: Anthropology, Archaeology, Art and Architecture. Routledge.
                                                                                            Technoscience and Postphenomenology: The Manhattan Papers. Lexington
John, P. (2018) How Far to Nudge?: Assessing Behavioural Public Policy. Edward Elgar.       Books:189-204
Kimbell, L. (2012) Rethinking Design Thinking: Part 2, Design and Culture, 4(2):129-148     Wallace-Wells, D. (201() The Uninhabitable Earth: A Story of the Future, Allen Lane
Kossoff, G., Irwin, T. and Willis, A.-M. (2015) Transition Design. DPP, 13(1):1-2.          Wilde, D. and Andersen, K. (2013) Postcards from a (Better) Future: Process as Making.
                                                                                            Nordes 1(5).
Leggett, W. (2014). The politics of behaviour change: nudge, neoliberalism and the
state. Policy & Politics 42(1):3–19                                                         Willis, A-M. (2006) Ontological designing. DPP.
Licoppe, C. (2010) The ‘Performative Turn’ In Science And Technology Studies. J.
Cultural Economy 3(2):181-188
Light, A (2011a) HCI as heterodoxy: Technologies of identity and the queering of
interaction with computers. Interacting with Computers. 23(5)
Light, A. (2011b) Democratising Technology: Inspiring Transformation with Design,
Performance and Props. CHI’11:2239-2242
Light, A. (2015) Troubling Futures: can participatory design research provide a
constitutive anthropology for the 21st century? IxD&A, 26:81-94
Light, A., Brereton, M. and Roe, P. (2015). Some Notes on the Design of World Machines.
OzCHI’15

254                                                                                                                                                                                   255
          Metaphors and
           imaginaries in
      design research for
                 change
      Dan Lockton, Michelle Chou, Aadya Krishnaprasad,
          Deepika Dixit, Stefania La Vattiata, Jisoo Shon,
                 Matt Geiger and Tammar Zea-Wolfson
256                                                    257
Abstract                                                                                     However, the interaction between behaviour and how people think and
A component of design research for change that has been underexplored                        make meaning has been at risk of being simplified away in the rush
by designers focused primarily on changing behaviour, is the potential                       towards a deterministic ‘behavioural lookup table’ model for design
to use design methods to investigate how people think. In particular,
the metaphors, mental imagery, and other forms of imaginaries which                          (Watson et al, 2015, discussed in Lockton and Ranner, 2017). Focusing
influence how people act and make sense of the world, individually, and                      solely on behaviour models people in a way which simply does not
as a society, are topics which design research is well-placed to explore.                    match the complexity and interconnectedness of real-life practices.
This paper illustrates three projects addressing these areas (relating to                    People’s actions, now and in the future, are deeply enmeshed with
energy use, life and career, and generating new metaphors), and argues
that by seeking to ‘understand people’s understanding better’, design                        social and cultural contexts, power structures, and other people’s
research can contribute useful forms of enquiry for informing other                          actions, and more nuanced than any singular vision can ever capture,
academic disciplines dealing with large-scale challenges such as health,                     which highlights the inadequacy of strongly reductive approaches,
environment, politics, and social issues.                                                    appealing as these models might sometimes be. People, societies
                                                                            Figure 1. A      and their actions are diverse, even in the face of attempts to design
                                                                            metaphorical     this away, or treat it as reduced. Along these lines, Brynjarsdóttir et
                                                                            ‘project land-   al. (2012) characterise much design for behaviour change (specifically
                                                                            scape’ built     around sustainability) as ‘a modernist enterprise’ (p947), focusing both
                                                                            and annotat-     on individuals at the expense of broader social considerations, and on
                                                                            ed by a group    narrowing the broad scope of sustainability into ‘the more manageable
                                                                            of undergrad-
                                                                                             problem of ‘resource management’’ (p948).
                                                                            uate design
                                                                            students to
                                                                            represent        Beyond these critiques, though, is an area where design research can
                                                                            a collective     contribute further to change: investigating and engaging with how we
                                                                            mental model     think. Just as design influences our behaviour, the designed systems
                                                                            of a group       and environments we inhabit affect, and are affected by, how we think
                                                                            project they     and understand and make sense of the world, individually and together.
                                                                            had worked       How we think about the world affects what we do. The imaginaries we
Introduction: Understanding how people think, instead of just               on, with its
                                                                                             have (Jasanoff and Kim, 2015; Speed et al, 2019)—the stories we tell
trying to change behaviour                                                  ups, downs,
                                                                            and emotions     ourselves and each other, the mental models, language, framings and
All design influences our behaviour, from the layout of our cities, to                       metaphors we use, the associations and mental imagery that come to
                                                                            (Ricketts and
the choices of data required by a form, to the aesthetic choices made                        mind when we think about concepts—make a difference to the way we
                                                                            Lockton,
in food packaging, to the interface design of the software which you        2019).           approach the issues that affect us, from interacting with technology in
may be using to read this paper. We are living our everyday lives within                     everyday life right up to global challenges such as climate change and
multiple intersecting designed systems, at many scales, and the design                       the rise of extreme populism. “How do we understand?” is becoming
of those systems has an influence on how we act, and how we can act.                         increasingly important as we become enmeshed in complex systems of
In recent years, the field of design for behaviour change (and allied                        nature, technology and society, from ecosystems to AI to big data to
areas such as persuasive technology) has emerged as a key component                          our own health. Design working on behaviour change has so far largely
of a broader ‘design for change’ agenda (Niedderer et al, 2016), with an                     ignored this dimension, and yet it potentially offers a deeper and
explicit focus on trying to change people’s behaviour intentionally, for                     richer understanding of the human condition within the socio-technical
example around health, environmental impact, safety, and other social                        ecologies of our lives—although we must not forget that the ‘we’ in so
issues (in addition to many with a commercial benefit agenda). Design                        much of this kind of work is rooted in western, privileged positions and
researchers have been at the forefront of translating and transposing                        notions of everyday life (Schultz et al, 2018; Abdulla et al, 2019). But this
knowledge from other academic disciplines such as social and cognitive                       is an opportunity for design research to contribute to scientific, social
psychology and behavioural economics into practically actionable forms                       scientific, and humanities enquiry more widely as part of just transitions
for designers and other practitioners involved in a variety of domains                       to more sustainable societies (White, 2019; Boehnert et al, 2018).
(e.g. Lilley & Wilson, 2017; Daae & Boks, 2014; Selvefors, 2017; Lockton
et al, 2013a). The approach has, in modified form, made its way into                         Design research, including techniques and methods developed by
government policy, discussed as ‘neuroliberalism’ by Whitehead et al                         designers for use in developing new products and services, can offer new
(2017), and its methods been adopted and adapted by NGOs and think                           perspectives on exploring these imaginaries and their consequences
tanks; there are industry conferences and even design consultancies                          for human behaviour, complementing social and cognitive sciences
specialising in the field. The ‘behavioural design’ research programme                       with an experiential layer. Design methods can also help us go beyond
has had impact.                                                                              characterising what we have already, and actively develop and propose
258                                                                                                                                                                          259
new ways to understand, and new ways to live (Lockton and Candy,           series of events with adults and young people, given media including
2018), supporting people’s imagining and helping them conceive of          pens, crayons, inks and pastels, we arrived at a collection of 180
new perspectives for behaviour and practices in the future.                drawings (Bowden et al, 2015) that present a diverse and multifaceted
                                                                           picture of people’s ideas, mental imagery, mental models, experiences
This paper briefly introduces three projects which explore considering     and notions of what energy ‘looks’ like. As a way into making this often
metaphors and imaginaries more widely almost as a ‘material’ for
design research, a rich source of insight and a site of opportunity for                                                                               Figure 2
                                                                                                                                                      and 3. Two
design researchers to enact change with societal and environmental
                                                                                                                                                      examples
benefit in different domains. We use the term ‘metaphor’ in a broad,                                                                                  from ‘Draw-
imprecise way, to refer to a variety of ways in which one thing can be                                                                                ing Energy’
understood in terms of another.                                                                                                                       (Bowden
                                                                                                                                                      et al, 2015)
Energy Imaginaries: What does energy look like?                                                                                                       created by
The SusLabNWE project was a European collaboration around studying                                                                                    members of
                                                                                                                                                      the public.
and influencing more sustainable behaviour in domestic contexts,
through Living Lab methodology (Keyson et al, 2016), including both
dedicated Living Lab houses, and a selection of participants given
a range of sensors and experience sampling equipment for their
own homes. Much of the work focused on investigating energy use
behaviour, which is a major component of design for sustainable
behaviour research. As design researchers engaged in ethnographic
research with householders (Lockton et al, 2013b), we quickly found
that the design of the energy monitors and feedback systems that
were intended to influence people’s behaviour were not necessarily
designed with reference to people’s mental models (Johnson-Laird,
1983; Gentner & Stevens, 1983) of energy—notions which were diverse
and with associations much broader than heat or electricity.

One of the main themes emerging was the general invisibility of energy
in modern life, and the consequences of this for behaviour and everyday
practices. Householders’ mental models of energy itself, and energy-
using systems such as heating, together with the relative importance
of different energy-using systems in the home, were partly determined
by what was most salient—such as lighting—rather than ‘hidden’ uses
such as heating and cooling. By people’s own admission, much of the
energy ‘wasted’ at home through particular behaviours, such as leaving
heating on when going out, or leaving lights on elsewhere in the
house, was partly due to its invisibility from the perspective of where
they were at the time. People questioned how they could change how
they use energy when they can’t easily see or feel it, or get a sense
of the changing rate at which it is being used. We found confusion
with the different characteristics of energy use by different appliances   intangible and amorphous subject visible and engageable-with, the
(e.g. the ‘spike’ of a kettle compared with the continuous power drawn     broad and sometimes contrasting range of personal definitions and
by lighting), and units, for example between kilowatts as a measure of     conceptualisations of energy (Figure 2 and 3) illustrate participants’
power and kilowatt-hours as a measure of energy.                           aesthetic perceptions and judgement of energy via metaphors,
                                                                           categorisations, characterisations and associations, leading to possible
One simple way to explore this further was to ask people ‘What does        design implications for new forms of energy feedback or display
energy look like?’, applying what might be used as a creative icebreaker   (Bowden et al, 2015). (One direction we have taken, informed by some
exercise in design workshops as a research method in itself. Through a     of the metaphors which emerged, is energy sonification (Lockton et al
                                                                           2014, 2019a), which is outside the scope of this paper but has potential
260                                                                                                                                                             261
for ambient comprehension of energy use with multiple appliances,                        or in groups. Landscapes are a common type of metaphor in speech,
including pattern recognition and state changes).                                        particularly for talking about relations between parts of a whole, or
                                                                                         mapping the structure of one concept onto another. In organizations,
Mental Landscapes: Modelling imaginaries of career paths and                             we might talk about moving into new territory or the stakeholder
group projects                                                                           landscape, having a vantage point, mainstream and backwater,
The idea of using ‘design’ methods to explore the mental imagery and                     channelling our efforts, the lay of the land, descending into chaos,
metaphors which people have around abstract-but-important concepts                       oceans of possibilities—even blue sky thinking. We talk about food
seemed applicable to many other areas beyond energy—eliciting                            deserts and career paths, networks and decision trees, world-wide
metaphors, tacit or explicit, could be part of a self-reflection process                 webs and websites, sometimes directly comparing a new concept to an
for research participants themselves, or for researchers seeking to gain                 existing thing in a landscape, and sometimes using the idea in a more
qualitative insights around people’s understandings. Systems theorist                    abstract way. On a more fundamental level, we might even realize the
Peter Senge (1993) has called for teams within organizations to work                     spatial metaphors inherent in perspective, field, area, stance, position,
on “surfacing, testing, and improving [their] mental pictures of how the                 looking ahead, and, indeed, fundamental level. In developing the form
world works” to arrive at shared mental models; this approach could                      of the kit, we have taken inspiration from, or paralleled, approaches
also be useful for people individually. However, there is no right way to                including Liz Sanders’s MakeTools (Sanders and Stappers, 2013), Thudt
externalize thoughts. As David Jonassen and Young Hoan Cho (2008)                        et al.’s (2018) data physicalization for self-reflection, and other work on
put it, we need “visual prostheses” to share our mental imagery with                     embodied sensemaking, modeling in systemic design, and collective
each other.                                                                              imagery weaves (Jaasma et al, 2017; Aguirre Ulloa & Paulsen, 2017;
                                                                                         Chueng-Nainby et al, 2016).
                                                                            Figure 4.
                                                                            The Mental   In the ‘life landscapes’ workshop, master’s students in groups of five to
                                                                            Landscapes
                                                                                         seven, have been given 30 minutes to visualise the questions “What
                                                                            modelling
                                                                            process.     do the past and future look like as a landscape?” and “Where are we
                                                                                         going?” using the kit. The focus for most groups has been their own
                                                                                         perceptions of their journeys before, during—and imagined journey
                                                                                         after—graduating, but the scope has been open for groups to interpret
                                                                                         the questions in different ways. The collaborative challenge here was to
                                                                                         create a shared vision from what started as a disparate set of individual
                                                                                         experiences (Figure 3). Figure 5 shows one group explaining their
                                                                                         landscape, centred around a set of tributaries (different backgrounds)
                                                                                         coming together with the students on a raft together (their degrees),
                                                                                         heading—potentially via a whirlpool—for a variety of possibilities
                                                                                         ahead, from rocky shallows, to deserts with cacti, to hills representing
                                                                                         different kinds of careers.
                                                                                                                                                                       Figure 5.
                                                                                                                                                                       A group
                                                                                                                                                                       explains their
In Mental Landscapes (Ricketts and Lockton, 2019) we used developed                                                                                                    ‘life land-
a set of visual prostheses specifically to explore how students imagined                                                                                               scape’.
and thought about their own lives—career paths, but also more widely
their own pasts and possible futures, all based around a variety of
landscape metaphors. We also used the same kit to investigate groups’
conceptions of projects they had worked on together. The Mental
Landscapes kit comprises laser-cut card parts embodying a particular
set of metaphors based on stylised landscapes and features within
landscapes, such as hills, roads, fields, and weather. We have explored
the kit’s use through workshops where participants assemble and
arrange a variety of elements to make abstracted model landscapes
that on some level represent or translate their thinking, individually

262                                                                                                                                                                              263
Looking at how groups imagined projects they had worked on together,                            that shown in Figure 6, where not just the other events (e.g., the career
undergraduates worked in groups of three to five for 30 minutes, re-                            fair) in people’s calendars, but also the meaning of them to people,
forming groups they had previously worked in together on a recent                               along with each other’s perspectives on communication, different
project. They were asked to use the elements to create landscapes                               visions for the project, and so on, were visible and engageable-with.
representing whatever aspects they found important to emphasize:                                Beyond interface design, there is also something interesting in using
topics, challenges, project stages, roles, interpersonal relationships, and                     these kinds of methods to shed light on the unexamined metaphors
so on. Some projects started with “rocky” beginnings, represented by                            and mental models that are present in our collective (or not) societal
cones or hills. Others started with trees, rivers, and stars, representing                      imaginaries of abstract concepts such as technology, life, career,
periods of ideation, or general feelings of optimism. When projects                             family, and work—and issues such as climate change, our relationship
encountered difficulties later on, many groups represented these periods                        with nature, resources, artificial intelligence, mental and physical
with lightning, rain, and hills (e.g. Figure 6). Several groups came up                         health, national identities and international migration, social equity,
with names to represent specific parts of their project experiences, such                       government, new forms of economy, and quality of life. As such, our
as a “plateau of exhaustion” before the project came to an end, or even                         aim in developing the kit further will be for it to be useful at multiple
in one case a “hell.” In Figure 1, for example, the group illustrated how                       levels, from individual reflection to community-based participatory
at the beginning of their project, they were in a “marsh of uncertainty.”                       design workshops—giving a community the opportunity to reflect
Negative feedback was represented by a “sinking whirlpool” and rain                             on and learn about its own thinking—and expanding beyond solely
clouds. The grey, dry “desert of inspiration” represents not having a                           landscape metaphors.
lot of ideas, but the blue circles represent the team enjoying working
                                                                                                                                                                            Figure 7.
together. Eventually they found an “oasis of teamwork,” which led to “a
                                                                                                                                                                            A group of
paradise of creation” and eventually completing the project.                                                                                                                interaction
                                                                                                                                                                            designers at
Using design methods in this kind of way can make a contribution to                                                                                                         the UX Lis-
what might traditionally have been text- or interview-based forms of                                                                                                        bon industry
inquiry. Exploring which elements of mental models are shared between                                                                                                       conference
group members—and which are not—and the discussion around these                                                                                                             use the New
issues once surfaced, can give useful insights for researchers seeking to                                                                                                   Metaphors
                                                                                                                                                                            cards to
understand understanding. For example, different metaphors used by
                                                                                                                                                                            rethink the
participants could inspire a new form of interface design for life planning                                                                                                 framing of
or project-management tools. Imagine collaborative project-planning                                                                                                         issues.
                                                                              Figure 6.
software—or even an augmented reality or tangible interface—enabling
                                                                              Here, as
team members to shape and annotate elements in a landscape such as            explained by
                                                                              the group, in-
                                                                              itially extreme
                                                                              weather rep-
                                                                              resents a com-    New Metaphors: Using the power of creativity to generate new
                                                                              munication        framings for big issues
                                                                              breakdown;        Another direction for exploring metaphors within design for change
                                                                              a rising sun      is around intentionally seeking, and creating, new metaphors. In
                                                                              represents the
                                                                                                interaction design, new metaphors may commonly be considered
                                                                              group starting
                                                                              to understand
                                                                                                where a new product or technology offers new affordances which
                                                                              what was          require some ‘anchoring’ (itself a metaphor) to a familiar concept (Cila,
                                                                              going on. The     2013; Jung et al 2017). But there is a much bigger potential.
                                                                              mountain and
                                                                              swirl of peo-     Many challenges facing humanity today and in the future are complex,
                                                                              ple represent     involving relationships, systemic intricacies, and timescales which
                                                                              the pressure      are difficult to understand and represent in simple terms. As such,
                                                                              and opportu-
                                                                                                humans simplify; and those simplifications can have consequences
                                                                              nity of a major
                                                                              career fair at
                                                                                                which impede attempts to tackle problems. For example, the multiple
                                                                              that time in      feedback loops, scale and duration, uncertainty and non-linearity of
                                                                              the project.      climate change may be reduced by popular media discourse to ‘global
264                                                                                                                                                                                  265
warming’, a framing whose ‘validity’ (along with trust in science itself) is   and that a method for doing so could be a useful part of the designer’s
held open to question.                                                         toolbox. The method is very simple: participants browse sets of image
                                                                               and text cards which they combine in creative ways to suggest possible
Often, complex issues are rendered understandable through the use              metaphors (optionally going through a characteristic-mapping process),
of metaphors and analogies, and indeed it has been argued that these           and then they think further about how a concept might be developed
are central to human reasoning, understanding, and creativity (Boden,          based around the new metaphors they have generated. This process of
1992; Hofstadter, 2001) as well as the linguistic aspects of cognition         bisociation—as described by Arthur Koestler (1964), “the perceiving of
itself (Lakoff and Johnson, 1980). There are many phenomena where              a situation or idea… in two self-consistent but habitually incompatible
new metaphors could potentially enable new forms of understanding,             frames of reference”—or simple juxtaposition of ideas as a provocation
sharing or changing mental models, or experiencing otherwise invisible         in the style of Edward de Bono (1971) is a common feature of inspiration
processes in more interesting ways.                                            card workshops (Biskjaer et al, 2017) and is fast-paced, intended to
                                                                               be a creative trigger method to generate multiple ideas quickly and
One simple reason for metaphors’ prevalence is that by mapping                 then enable subsequent evaluation and development. The workshop
features of an existing or familiar situation onto a new or unknown            participants may come with their own specific domain knowledge or a
one, we are enabled to grasp it more quickly. Nevertheless, metaphors          problem or issue for which they seek new metaphors, or they may use
are not the thing itself—they are always an abstraction, a model               the cards to address topics of which they have little knowledge, but
of the situation. They can be a map to a territory, but should not be          which can nevertheless provide a provocation for thinking differently.
mistaken for the territory. Artists and poets may be experts in creating       Some of the cards are shown in Figures 8, 9, and 10.
new metaphors, but as well as within design practice, the intentional
                                                                                                                                                            Figure 8. How
construction of metaphors to enable new ways of thinking has been
                                                                                                                                                            could burnt
proposed by people in many fields, ranging from anthropology (e.g.                                                                                          toast be a
Margaret Mead and Mary Catherine Bateson) to politics (e.g. George                                                                                          metaphor
Lakoff). In economics, studies have noted how the metaphor of ‘the                                                                                          for climate
national economy as a household budget’, or even ‘a container/bucket/                                                                                       change?
pot’ commonly employed by media and politicians, is a structural                                                                                            Could
error in terms of many key features of the systems, such as fixation on                                                                                     cracks in the
‘balancing the books’ or people in need being ‘a drain on the system’.                                                                                      paving be
                                                                                                                                                            a metaphor
This leads to specific policy decisions being made that arguably cause
                                                                                                                                                            for unwritten
harm. How would political discourse on the economy be different if                                                                                          rules, or a net
a different metaphor were used? We can imagine ideas such as the                                                                                            a metaphor
economy is a garden or the economy is a loaf od bread being baked;                                                                                          for anxiety?
the New Economy Organisers’ Network, New Economics Foundation
and partners (2018) tested new metaphors such as the economy is a
computer that can be programmed through surveys with the British
public. From global issues to local ones (e.g. engagement with local
government), right down to the personal level (e.g. mental health), there
is an opportunity for new metaphors to be generated, and adopted and           There are two types of cards: ‘Thing 1’ cards, solely textual, feature the
adapted from other cultures, traditions, and contexts, and their effects       names of an assorted selection of phenomena and abstract concepts
on people’s understanding of issues investigated. As Schön (1979)              which may be difficult to visualise, but which might be possible to
argued for the examination of generative metaphor in problem-setting           do through using a metaphor. They are drawn from the authors’ own
in social policy, exploring the metaphors in use can condition the ways        noticings, and from concepts which have been suggested by students,
that problems are approached, and generating different metaphors can           previous workshop participants, and topics in previous projects.
enable new perspectives.                                                       These ranged from invisible system relationships (e.g. power relations
                                                                               between people or even wifi signals) to intangible emotions, feelings
We have created a card deck and workshop format (Figure 7), New                or personality properties (e.g. confidence or a headache). The Thing
Metaphors (Lockton et al 2019b) which aims to inspire creative                 1 cards are ‘optional’ for the workshop process, in the sense that
approaches to designing novel interfaces, products, services,                  participants may already have problems or issues for which they seek
communication campaigns, ways of explaining ideas, and more widely,            new metaphors. Some of the workshops we have run have explicitly
reframing of societal issues around technology and other issues of             asked participants to come with domain-specific issues themselves.
global importance, providing an expanded ‘conceptual vocabulary’,
266                                                                                                                                                                    267
                                                                              Figure 9. A                                                                                    Figure 10.
                                                                              selection                                                                                      A selection
                                                                              of Thing 1                                                                                     of Thing 2
                                                                              cards—some                                                                                     cards—phe-
                                                                              phenomena                                                                                      nomena in
                                                                              and abstract                                                                                   the world
                                                                              concepts                                                                                       which could
                                                                              which may                                                                                      potentially be
                                                                              be difficult to                                                                                an interesting
                                                                              visualise, but                                                                                 metaphor for
                                                                              which might                                                                                    some of the
                                                                              be possible                                                                                    Thing 1 cards
                                                                              to do through                                                                                  or other
                                                                              using a meta-                                                                                  concepts.
                                                                              phor.




Thing 2 cards show a photograph and the name of a phenomenon in                                 characteristics of the phenomena being considered, but other groups
the world which could potentially be an interesting metaphor for some                           had leapt straight to a concept.
of the Thing 1s—an arbitrarily chosen mixture of natural and artificial
phenomena (and sometimes combinations of the two). The examples                                 One direction for further in-depth research here could be an analysis of
were partly drawn from sensory or synaesthesia-inspired ideas (Lee et                           how the backgrounds and experience of the participants (which we did
al, 2019), such as sweetness, and partly from everyday phenomena                                not explicitly assess) related to the kinds of ideas generated, or whether
that seemed interesting as potential ‘design’ material—particularly                             particular combinations or attributes of Thing 1 and Thing 2 could apply
drawing on work around qualitative interface design (Lockton et al,                             to certain domains better than others. This work could lead to a much
2017), indexical visualisation (Offenhuber and Telhan, 2015) and data                           more structured, guided form of ideation process.
physicalisation (Jansen et al, 2015)—from the hum of a fridgew to the
arrangement of your desktop.                                                                    There are at least two directions this research could go in applying
                                                                                                this work within design for change. One is to use the New Metaphors
A set of worksheets helps guide participants through mapping                                    method and cards (suitably expanded or reorganised in content) to
characteristics between Thing 2 and Thing 1 (or other concepts). With                           generate and iterate more targeted design concepts for new interfaces,
a more focused procedure, there is potential for incorporation of a                             products, services, communication campaigns, ways of explaining an
‘metaphor search stage’ into design processes; alternatively, there is                          idea, or other developments for particular situations and domains, for
still potentially value in treating this as a kind of fun creative thinking                     example new metaphors for interface design around mental health.
exercise in itself, to help open up new ways of thinking, even if the                           We are interested in the potential for new metaphors to influence and
concepts generated are not developed further. Participants’ comments                            support decision-making, behaviour change and new practices through
from New Metaphors workshops run at a range of user experience                                  enabling new forms of understanding, as an aid to help people explore
design industry conferences in France, Portugal, and the US (and                                their own and each other’s thinking, and specifically to help people
student workshops in Chile and the US) included insights around how                             understand their relationships and agency with the systems around
the process had worked in practice—some groups had set themselves                               them. Practically, we are taking this forward with student projects where
the challenge to work with whatever juxtaposition was chosen (even                              the goal is the design, and the New Metaphors method is simply part
semi-randomly), while others had worked through many different                                  of the process of getting there.
combinations to find ones that ‘worked’ in terms of structural similarity,
or even in being a ‘problem’ that interested the group. The mapping                             Another direction is to apply the idea of generating new metaphors
worksheets have been useful to some groups in working through the                               to bigger situations beyond design: to engage with reframing social,

268                                                                                                                                                                                    269
political, or technological issues, involving stakeholders and domain         References
experts from specialist policy and non-profit organisations, or even to
use a variant of the method with teams or community groups as part of         Abdulla, D., Ansari, A., Canlı,, E., Keshavarz, M., Kiem, M., Prado de O. Martins, L.,
a co-design process, surfacing existing metaphors and mental imagery,         Vieira de Oliveira, P.J.S. (2019). Decolonizing Design Manifesto. In Resnick, E. (ed.), The
                                                                              Social Design Reader, Bloomsbury, London, 20–30.
and helping explore the possibilities of transitioning to different ones
(Lockton and Candy, 2018).                                                    Aguirre Ulloa, M. and Paulsen, A. (2017). Codesigning with relationships in mind:
                                                                              Introducing relational material mapping. Form Akademisk 10, 1, 1–14.
                                                                              Biskjaer, M.M., Dalsgaard, P., Halskov, K. (2017). Understanding Creativity Methods in
Discussion: Enabling sharing and discussion of metaphors and                  Design. In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Designing Interactive Systems (DIS
imaginaries as a way to address change                                        ‘17). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 839-851
Each of these three projects in some way concerns materialising               Boden, M.A. (1992). The Creative Mind: Myths and Mechanisms. Abacus, London.
abstract ideas (or at least making connections between an abstract            Boehner, K., Gaver, B., Boucher, A. (2012). Probes. In: Celia Lury and Nina Wakeford,
idea and something more concrete): putting ‘things’ into the world that       eds. Inventive Methods: The Happening of the Social. Routledge, London
only previously existed in the mind’s eye of participants, to explore and     Boehnert, J., Lockton, D., Mulder, I. (2018). ‘Editorial: Designing for Transitions’. DRS
understand their role and presence, effects and effectiveness, in the         2018: Design Research Society, 25–28 June 2018, Limerick
‘real’ world.                                                                 de Bono, E. (1971). The Use of Lateral Thinking. Pelican, Harmondsworth.
                                                                              Bowden, F., Lockton, D., Gheerawo, R., Brass, C. (2015). Drawing Energy: Exploring
We believe there is potential to use these kinds of methods, suitably         Perceptions of the Invisible. London: Royal College of Art
developed, to help people capture, express, share, and communicate
                                                                              Brynjarsdottir, H., Håkansson, M., Pierce, J., Baumer, E. P. S., DiSalvo, C., and Sengers, P.
the often unspoken qualitative dimensions of their experiences, to make       (2012). ‘Sustainably Unpersuaded: How Persuasion Narrows Our Vision of Sustainability’.
them reified, palpable, to enable discussion or peer support, or even         Proceedings of CHI 2012, ACM, New York, NY, USA, 947-956.
to facilitate group or team sensemaking. Even the process of surfacing        Chueng-Nainby, P., Lee, J., Zi, B., and Gardin, A. (2016). A creative ontological analysis
assumptions could have value in many applications.                            of collective imagery during co-design for service innovation. Proceedings of DRS 2016:
                                                                              Design Research Society, Brighton, UK.
What are we changing, or aiming to change? As part of design for              Cila. N. (2013). Metaphors we design by: The use of metaphors in product design. PhD
change, the aim would be that this work helps bring a different               thesis, TU Delft.
approach to programmes around behaviour change, whether related               Daae, J.Z. and Boks, C. (2014). Dimensions of Behaviour Change. Journal of Design
to health, environment, politics, social issues, or other areas. By seeking   Research, 12(3), 145-172.
to understand people’s understanding better, through design, we aim           Gentner, D. & Stevens, A.L. (1983). Mental Models. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
to contribute to design research, but also to offer design research           Associates.
methods as useful forms of inquiry for informing other academic               Hofstadter, D.R. (2001). Analogy as the core of cognition. In D. Gentner, K. J. Holyoak,
disciplines—for example, the growing interest in ‘inventive’ methods in       & B. N. Kokinov (Eds.), The Analogical Mind: Perspectives from Cognitive Science. MIT
sociology (Boehner et al, 2012; Lupton, 2018). This could bring design        Press, Cambridge. 499–538
research into new areas of application in domains which have hitherto         Jaasma, P., Smit, D., van Dijk, J., Latcham, T., Trotto, A., and Hummels, C. (2017). The
only had limited engagement with ‘design methods’ as generators of            blue studio: Designing an interactive environment for embodied multi-stakeholder
                                                                              ideation processes. Proc. TEI ’17. ACM, New York, 2017, 1–10.
knowledge. We are intrigued by the idea that designers could become
                                                                              Jansen, Y., Dragicevic, P., Isenberg, P., Alexander, J., Karnik, A., Kildal, J., Subramanian,
valuable members of research teams in a wide variety of disciplines,
                                                                              S. and Hornbæk,K. (2015). Opportunities and Challenges for Data Physicalization. In
using methods adapted from design research practice to address                Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing
social, cultural, economic, environmental and political change far            Systems (CHI ‘15). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 3227-3236.
beyond design itself.                                                         Jasanoff, S. and Kim, S-H. (2015). Dreamscapes of Modernity Sociotechnical Imaginaries
                                                                              and the Fabrication of Power. University of Chicago Press.
                                                                              Johnson-Laird, P.N. (1983). Mental Models. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
                                                                              Jonassen, D. and Cho, Y.H. (2008). Externalizing mental models with Mindtools. In D.
                                                                              Ifenthale, P. Pirnay-Dummer, and J.M. Spector, eds., Understanding Models for Learning
                                                                              and Instruction. Springer, Berlin, 2008, 145–157.
                                                                              Jung, H., Wiltse, H., Wiberg, M. and Stolterman, E. (2017). Metaphors, materialities,
                                                                              and affordances: Hybrid morphologies in the design of interactive artifacts. Design
                                                                              Issues 53: 24-46
                                                                              Keyson, D.V., Guerra-Santin, O., Lockton, D. (2016) Living Labs: Design and Assessment
                                                                              of Sustainable Living. Berlin: Springer


270                                                                                                                                                                           271
Koestler, A (1964). The Act of Creation. Hutchinson, London.                                   Schultz, T., Abdulla, D., Ansari, A., Canlı, E., Keshavarz, M., Kiem, M. Prado de O.
                                                                                               Martins, L. and Vieira de Oliveira, P.J.S. (2018). What Is at Stake with Decolonizing
Lakoff, G. and Johnson, M. (1980). Metaphors We Live By. University of Chicago Press,
                                                                                               Design? A Roundtable, Design and Culture, 10(1), 81-101.
Chicago.
                                                                                               Selvefors, A. (2017). Design Beyond Interventions – Supporting Less Energy-reliant
Lee, C.H., Lockton, D., Stevens, J., Wang, S.J., Ahn, S-H. (2019). Synaesthetic-Translation
                                                                                               Activities in the Everyday. PhD thesis, Chalmers University of Technology, Gothenburg.
Tool: Synaesthesia as an Interactive Material for Ideation. In Extended Abstracts of the
2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI EA ‘19). ACM,                   Senge, P.M. (1993). The Fifth Discipline: The Art & Practice of The Learning Organization.
New York, NY, USA.                                                                             Century Business, London, 1993.
Lilley, D. and Wilson, G.T. (2017).Design for Sustainable Behaviour. In: Chapman,J.(ed.).      Speed, C., Nissen, B., Pschetz, L., Murray-Rust, D., Mehrpouya, H., Oosthuizen, S. (2019).
The Routledge Handbook of Sustainable Product Design, Routledge, London, 127-144.              Designing New Socio-Economic Imaginaries. Proceedings of EAD 2019, Dundee: 13th
                                                                                               European Academy of Design Conference.
Lockton, D., Harrison, D., Stanton, N.A. (2013a). Exploring design patterns for
sustainable behaviour. The Design Journal 16(4), 431-459                                       Thudt, A., Hinrichs, U., Huron, S. and Carpendale, S. (2018). Self-reflection and personal
                                                                                               physicalization construction. Proc. CHI ’18. ACM, New York, 2018, paper 154.
Lockton, D., Bowden, F., Greene, C., Brass, C., Gheerawo, R. (2013b). People and energy:
A design-led approach to understanding everyday energy use behaviour. Proceedings              Watson, J., Clegg, C., Cowell, C., Davies, F., Hughes, C., McCarthy, N., Westbury, P.
of EPIC 2013: Ethnographic Praxis in Industry Conference, 15-18 September 2013,                (eds) (2015). Built for Living: Understanding Behaviour and the Built Environment
Royal Institution, London                                                                      through Engineering and Design. Royal Academy of Engineering, London.
Lockton, D., Bowden, F., Brass, C., Gheerawo, R. (2014). Bird-wattching: exploring             White, D. (2019). Just Transitions/Design for Transitions: Preliminary Notes on a Design
sonification of home electricity use with birdsong. SoniHED – Conference on Sonification       Politics for a Green New Deal. Capitalism Nature Socialism,
of Health and Environmental Data, 12 September 2014, York
                                                                                               Whitehead, M., Jones, R., Lilley, R., Pykett, J, and Howell, R. (2017). Neuroliberalism
Lockton, D. and Candy, S. (2018). A Vocabulary for Visions in Designing for Transitions.       Behavioural Government in the Twenty-First Century, 1st Edition. Routledge, London.
Proceedings of DRS 2018: Design Research Society, 25–28 June 2018, Limerick
Lockton, D., Crawford, G., Singh, D., Wu, S. (2019a). Electric Acoustic: Exploring Energy
Through Sonic & Vibration Displays. In Extended Abstracts of the 2019 CHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI EA ‘19). ACM, New York, NY, USA.
Lockton, D., Singh, D., Sabnis, S., Chou, M., Foley, S., Pantoja, A. (2019b). New
Metaphors: A Workshop Method for Generating Ideas and Reframing Problems in
Design and Beyond. Proceedings of C&C 2019: ACM Conference on Creativity &
Cognition. June 2019, San Diego
Lockton, D. and Ranner, V. (2017). Plans and speculated actions: Design, behaviour and
complexity in sustainable futures. In: Chapman, J. (ed.), The Routledge Handbook of
Sustainable Product Design. London: Routledge, 487-501
Lockton, D., Ricketts, D., Aditya Chowdhury, S., Lee, C.H. (2017).‘Exploring Qualitative
Displays and Interfaces. In Extended Abstracts of CHI ’17: ACM CHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM, New York, 1844-1852
Lupton, D. (2018). Towards design sociology. Sociology Compass. 2018;12:e12546
New Economy Organisers’ Network, New Economics Foundation, FrameWorks
Institute, an Public Interest Research Centre. 2018. Framing The Economy: How to win
the case for a better system. New Economics Foundation, London.
Niedderer, K., Ludden, G., Clune, S. J., Lockton, D., Mackrill, J., Morris, A., Cain, R.,
Gardiner, E., Evans, M., Gutteridge, R., Hekkert, P. P. (2016). ‘Design for behaviour change
as a driver for sustainable innovation: Challenges and opportunities for implementation
in the private and public sectors’. International Journal of Design, 10(2), 67-85.
Offenhuber, D. and Telhan, O.. (2015). Indexical Visualization—the Data-Less
Information Display. In Ulrik Ekman, Jay David Bolter, Lily Diaz, Morten Søndergaard,
and Maria Engberg (eds.). Ubiquitous Computing, Complexity and Culture: 288–303.
Routledge, New York
Ricketts, D. and Lockton, D. (2019).‘Mental Landscapes: Externalizing Mental Models
Through Metaphors. Interactions 26(2), 86-90
Sanders, E. and Stappers, P-J. (2013). Convivial Toolbox: Generative Research for the
Front End of Design. BIS, Amsterdam.
Schön, D. (1979). Generative Metaphor: A perspective on problem-setting in social
policy. In: Andrew Ortony (ed.), Metaphor and Thought. Cambridge University Press.




272                                                                                                                                                                                         273
                 Creative
          interventions in
      the juvenile justice
       system of India: A
         systemic inquiry
      Aishwarya S. Narvekar, Aishwarya Rane, Kamal and
                                          Pankaj Yadav
274                                                 275
Abstract                                                                     Project introduction
Reformation of children who have come in conflict with law happens           Nelson Mandela once said, “When a man is denied the right to live the
through a traditional Judiciary system. This fairly neglected system         life he believes in, he has no choice but to become an outlaw.” Children
deals with children of today, who will be contributing members of the        have impressionable minds and the perspective towards society may be
society tomorrow. This is why reformation for the person who comes in        shaped during the formative years. At such an impressionable age, it is
the purview of the system is more essential than the action that brings      very easy to take rash decisions and commit actions that are considered
him/her there. Keeping design at the centre of our research process          unfavourable in society.
we tried to study this system with a human centred approach trying
to understand what drives the process of reformation inside for the          Juvenile by definition is a child who, having not attained prescribed
children. Design, as a process, and drawing, as a tool, helped us break      age, cannot be held solely liable for his criminal act. This means that
barriers in communication and expression with the children who have          when a person of young age commits a crime, it must be assumed that
been in a closed institution during the important years of their learning    there are many other factors which caused him to commit the action
lives. An important part of the study was to co-create for the system        that he is being held responsible for. Thus, if a child commits a crime, it
along with different individuals in the system. This approach helped         reveals a larger tear in the fabric of society.
to gain valuable insight into the system and also prevent actions and
approaches that are unfavourable in this highly sensitive area. This study   Close to 20,000 juveniles are reported to be committing crime in India
will attempt to define the method found to interact and co-create with       itself, out of which, 7.2% are reported for repeated crimes. This number
individuals in a secure and confidential system. The study also explores     fluctuates yearly, due to the large number of unreported cases or cases
the possibility to use gamification as an approach to problem solving.       that are not processed, so that the juvenile is not treated as a criminal
The exploration of reformation strategies has led to this conclusion         for the rest of his/he life and gets another chance to be a responsible
and it is found that it promotes voluntary participation on behalf of the    member of the society.
inmates.
                                                                             The study began with the purpose to find the most effective method
Introduction                                                                 of reformation for juvenile delinquents in India and later evolved into
Reformation of children who come in conflict with the law has been           an understanding of the role of design and designers in the process of
happening through the Juvenile Justice System in India. This system          reform and rehabilitation. The attempt is to take the human centred
which deals specifically with children remains neglected in the larger       practice of design, and apply it to a large scale social system.
system of Judiciary. The children who come under the purview of this
system get a chance to come out as contributing members of the               India, a developing country, has only recently begun to understand the
society in the future.                                                       importance of design in the corporate world and thus, the practice has
                                                                             not yet been translated to the social sector. The findings of this study
Therefore, reformation is essential than the action that brings him/her      will also help determine the role of design in furthering the social cause.
there. Keeping design at the center of our research process we tried to
study this system with a human centered approach trying to understand
what drives the process of reformation inside for the children. Design,      The existing justice system for juveniles
as a process, and drawing, as a tool, helped us break barriers in            The current Juvenile Justice System is governed by the Juvenile Justice
communication and expression with the children who have been in a            Act, recently amended in 2015 (Figure 1). It handles juveniles alleged
closed institution during the important years of their lives. An important   of crime and children in need of care and protection. When a child
part of the study was to co-create for the system. This approach helped
                                                                                                                                                           Figure 1. The
to gain valuable insight into the system and also prevent actions and                                                                                      current Juve-
approaches that are unfavourable in this highly sensitive area.                                                                                            nile Justice
                                                                                                                                                           System
This study will attempt to define the method found to interact and co-
create with individuals in a secure and confidential system. The study
also explores the possibility to use gamification as an approach to
problem solving. The exploration of reformation strategies has led to
this conclusion and it is found that it promotes voluntary participation
on behalf of the inmates.


276                                                                                                                                                                  277
is alleged of a crime, he/she must be dealt with by a special part of        examples of which are the Delhi prisons reform activities like Vipassana
the police force known as the Special Juvenile Police Unit (SJPU). A         by Lieutenant Governor Kiran Bedi and Sabarmati Jail Interventions by
non-uniformed police officer not in possession of any weapons and            the Prison Project.
trained to deal with juveniles should be present if a child is brought
into custody. Following the recording of the case and through report by      Kiran Bedi, during her posting at Delhi Prisons as Inspector General,
a Probation Officer, the child is presented before the Juvenile Justice      introduced several reforms to Tihar jail. These include meditation
Board (JJB), which is a committee comprising of the Judicial Magistrate      for the inmates, registered vocational courses, legal cells and even
and two social workers. The board reviews the case and comes to a            a de-addiction centre. This gained her acclaim and promoted the
judgement which is in the best interest of the child and the society; this   understanding of reformative activities in India, but the practice has yet
may be in the form of a fine, probation period /social service or a term     not translated to the juvenile system.
of stay in a registered observation home.
                                                                             The Prison project was an initiative driven by the National Institute of
The new amendment to the act states that any juvenile, guilty of             Design, India and Design Against Crime Research Centre, UK. The aim
a heinous crime will be given a sentence equivalent to an adult              of the project was to improve the lives of inmates through creative
committing the same crime. He will serve his sentence in two parts; in       interventions. The project introduced creative thinking to prison inmates,
an observation home till he attains the age of 18 and beyond that in an      to exercise their minds and contribute to society. It was successful in
adult prison.                                                                turning Sabarmati prison into a creative hub, and improve the lives of
                                                                             the inmates through individual, innovative projects. The success of this
The JJ Act defines a set of sixteen principles which have to be followed     approach inspired the approach of a gamified restorative approach.
when dealing with juveniles. These principles make sure that the child       Gamification shows great promise in ensuring behavioural change,
is dealt a fair and just trial.                                              especially in children. While children may not respond to explicit
                                                                             instructions, a gamified experience allows for greater involvement and
Children’s homes                                                             intrinsic learning. (10)
An observation home is a facility which houses incarcerated juvenile
delinquents. These homes provide temporary stay for juveniles under          Methodology
trial or stay for juveniles who have been given a term of stay by the        Since the topic of study of this paper was highly sensitive and involved
Juvenile Justice Board. The term of stay of a juvenile under trial           children, the methods commonly applied in Design Research which
must not exceed two months, and the term of stay of a convicted              focus on understanding the user through shadowing, interviews,
juvenile must not exceed three years. The observation homes provide          documentation, etc. couldn’t be applied here. The research aimed to
food, shelter, education and occasionally vocational training to the         get a deep understanding of how the system functions and insights
juveniles, differing in quality from home to home. Special homes house       into how reformation happens inside the observation homes. As Design
children who have committed a serious act of crime and have been             Researchers, we maintained focus on the people involved in the system
convicted. A place of safety houses the children who have committed          and how the juveniles thrive in the process they go through Interviews
an act of heinous crime and have been convicted. Place of safety could       with Stakeholders. The first phase involves meeting with stakeholders
be an individual institution or it could also be a section inside the        at different levels in the system and understanding their involvement,
Special Homes. For the purpose of this study, observation homes and          interaction with children and influence over the reforms taking place.
special homes are given a greater importance due to the environment          Multiple individuals from various fields were interviewed so as to gain
and attempts to reform and educate the                                       multiple perspectives and judge personal biases amongst individuals of
convicted juveniles.                                                         different standings.

The act specifies the correct way to deal with juveniles as being a          Fly on the wall observation
‘child-friendly’ method, where the juvenile does not feel threatened or      With thorough understanding of how the system functions by the law,
coerced by the actions of any member of the system. Child-friendly           the next phase was to look at interaction of stakeholders with juveniles
environments are also specified in the act.                                  on these levels in practice. This phase built a better understanding of
                                                                             how juvenile courts function, and the journey juvenile goes through
Reformation in India                                                         once inside the observation home.
Observation homes in India attempt to reform juveniles through
education, vocational training and regular sessions with counsellors.
Some successful methods of reform are seen in the adult prisons,

278                                                                                                                                                       279
To understand the behaviour of juveniles, a study was conducted into       Probation officers
the observation homes, by visiting several homes. The study had to         A probation officer conducts an intensive investigation of the case of
be conducted keeping in mind the sensitivity of the topic and the          the juvenile. He re-evaluates the police report and conducts a detailed
information gathered. No documentation was conducted inside the            investigation to come up with a Social Investigation Report, which is a
homes, complying with security standards and anonymity of all the          crucial factor based for the JJB hearing. Probation officers
inmates. All photos and sketches were taken, ensuring no humans in         have the task of looking at the family background of the juvenile, which
the frame and with permission of the concerned authorities. Conversing     is essential to figure out whether the child was under the influence of
with the juvenile also proved to be a limitation, as they were passively   the family or someone in the locality. This often leads to identification
encouraged only to speak highly of the system. Only a few openly           of other factors influencing the decisions of the child.
conversed in the presence of the guards. Permission to converse in the
absence of guards, teachers or counsellors was not granted.                NGOs
                                                                           Even though the JJS is a well-guarded system, there are some Children’s
Participatory research                                                     Homes which are working closely with NGOs to bring a more child-
Since, direct interviews with juveniles regarding their perspective on     centred approach to the reformation process. The current system faces
reforms were not permitted due to safety concerns and restrictions,        some challenges with staff availability, resources available,
interaction with them was through curated gamified sessions. These         individual attention for a thorough reformation, behaviour and attitude
sessions were conducted in 4 different Observation Homes across 2          towards the juveniles, etc. The NGOs and organizations working with
states in India. These sessions aimed to understand their response to      make sure some of these challenges are addressed and focus on the
the reformation process, behaviour and aspirations.                        socio-emotional development of the child inside. They also act as
                                                                           feedback agents for the directed system and emphasize for a child-
Primary research - The stakeholders                                        oriented reform over the system oriented one.
The primary research started out in phases, familiarising with the
stakeholders in the system and interacting with the juvenile children.     Research through design
These stakeholders helped identify some problems being faced at each       Visits were made to 4 institutions in India, to understand the environment
level & how those could affect the process of reformation intended for     and overall atmosphere that the convicted juveniles are kept in.
the juveniles.
                                                                              •   Observation Home, Khanpur, Ahmedabad, Gujrat
Police                                                                        •   Place of Safety, Mehsana, Gujarat
Ms. Panna Momaya, an IPS officer and the Head of Women and Child              •   David Sassoon Industrial School, Matunga, Mumbai, Maharashtra
Safety Department, helped to identify the working of the system and           •   Umerkhadi Children’s Home, Dongri, Mumbai, Maharashtra
the measures taken by the officials to protect the children who come
under the purview of the system. The officials who are trained to deal     The visits to the campus gave important insights into the infrastructure
with juveniles are supposed to take special measures to protect the        of the space, but not the childrens’ perspective. Directly approaching
identity of the child and follow a strict protocol with respect to their   the juveniles proved to be a challenge as asking questions, interviewing
behaviour, language and handling of them so as not to damage the           them and taking notes made them conscious of their situation and their
person psychologically in the process.                                     words and actions were restricted.

JJB                                                                        Participatory approach
Interaction with the Judicial Magistrate, who presides over the local      A new approach needed to be developed to approach the children in
Juvenile Justice Board (JJB) helped to understand some legal aspects       a way where they would be comfortable. Gamifying the whole process
of the proceedings and the parameters which decide the length of stay      helped to keep the children engaged in the process as well as express
of the person in an Observation Home and the process of                    themselves well beyond hesitation and language barriers. To go forward
Reformation he’ll go through during that time period. As the juveniles     a set of games and activities was devised, inspired from ice breakers
are still minors, maximum preference is given to keep them with their      and kindergarten activities (Figure 2).
family/guardians but in case of serious, heinous or multiple repeat
offences they are liable to go through a reformation process in the
Observation Homes.



280                                                                                                                                                     281
The activities were as such, in this particular order:                                    The activities were conducted in three of the Observation Homes,
                                                                                          Mehsana, Matunga and Dongri. All the boys who were interacted
                                                                                          with were Children in Conflict with the Law within the age group of
 Task 1    Arranging yourselves by Age: It was done to start a
                                                                                          14-21 years with 1-2 cases of above 21 in Mehsana, Place of Safety.
           conversation among the children and for us understand the
                                                                                          Only in Dongri we had a chance to interact with girls who were mostly
           age group.
                                                                                          Children in Need of Care and Protection with 3 cases of convicted
 Task 2    Draw your partners portrait: To connect to other children                      juveniles. Through the activities, we were able to come up with some
           and for us to gauge their skills and interest.                                 observations. Please note that any and all identities and personal
                                                                                          information divulged has been omitted for security reasons.
 Task 3    Draw your Hobby: To make them think about themselves
           and for us to grasp their personality and background.                          Case Study 1: Mehsana Observation Home and Place of Safety
 Task 4    Group according to similar hobbies: To see internal                            Mehsana Observation home for boys has both observation home and a
           dynamics and see what common pattern emerges.                                  Place of safety. It has about 50 children in conflict with law (CCL) within
                                                                                          the age group of 16-21. The Place of safety is for children convicted for
 Task 5    List 5 things in common within the group formed: To see                        heinous crimes. The children convicted for these crimes are supposed
           how well they know each other and initiate consensus                           to be kept separate and given special attention for reform.
           building.
 Task 6    Two truth and a lie: To make them think consciously about                         • Children showed enthusiasm for all the activities
           themselves                                                                        • Some children were hesitant and refused to participate in each
                                                                                               group.
 Task 7    New skill I want to learn: To build aspiration and see possible                   • Interest in sports, music and dance was seen commonly across
           intervention                                                                        groups.
                                                                                             • The groups were amicable as a whole.
 Task 8    New thing I learned in observation home: To see inmate-
                                                                                             • There was a willingness to learn new skills to beat boredom and
           staff relation and peer to peer relation.
                                                                                               preferred over classes which students didn’t attend largely.
 Task 9    One thing liked about the place: Adjustment in place and
           outlook towards the system                                                     During the visit, mention of a student at Mehsana came up as he was a
                                                                                          talented artist and the Home and officials worked to promote his talent.
 Task 10 What to do next: Interest level in activities.                                   This provided us with a solid example of how redirection of energy and
                                                                                          talents could help in the child flourishing even in the hardest conditions.

                                                                                          Case Study 2: David Sassoon Industrial School
                                                                             Figure 2.    The David Sassoon Industrial School is a certified Special Home. It is
                                                                             Children’s   a formal education and a vocational training centre with a focus on
                                                                             sketches     character development of children there and reformation of juvenile
                                                                                          delinquents. The sanctioned vacancy of the home is 400 boys ( 200
                                                                                          Children in Conflict with Law and 200 Children in Need of Care and
                                                                                          Protection) between the age group of 12 to 18 years of age.

                                                                                             • Children were slightly hesitant to draw initially but as they were
                                                                                               grouped, there was a stronger collective sense of initiative to
                                                                                               finish first and better.
                                                                                             • Quick, prompt response to tasks given was seen.
                                                                                             • Interest in sports like cricket, volleyball and dancing was common
                                                                                               across the group.
                                                                                             • Children were more enthusiastic and outspoken.




282                                                                                                                                                                     283
Case Study 3: Dongri children’s home                                          things everyone had in common inside and created a common ground
The home at Dongri is children’s home and observation home; meaning           for breaking the ice with each other.
that it houses both children in conflict with law and in need of care
and protection. One of the biggest observation homes in Asia, the             The period of isolation from society gives them time to reflect on the
Umerkhadi home currently houses about 230 children in need of care            actions but the lack of facilities, resources for aiding the further process
and protection; 150 boys and 80 girls; and about 60 children in conflict      of reformation puts them in a very vulnerable spot inside.
in law; about 3 - 4 of which are girls.
                                                                                 • There was a lack of communication among peers as well as staff
In Dongri, we conducted separate sessions with the boys and girls as               and the children
the sections were divided.                                                       • There was a lack of system in place which could keep teenagers
                                                                                   engaged and motivated during the period they were inside
      Girl’s Section                                                             • There is a need for positive reinforcement
      • Girls drew more detailed sketches rich with patterns and
         information                                                          Limitations
      • The girls were open and eager to learn any activity that we could     Lack of documentation in any form of the interactions inside the premise
         teach them                                                           of Observation Homes was necessary to protect the identity of children.
      • The girls showed most enthusiasm in jewelry and zari making.          The Juvenile Justice system in India is not a well-researched theme in
      • The girls while performing the tasks pushed to do it on their own     the design community.
         terms over the instructions given. There were traces of groupism     Convincing the guards and officials in the system of the possibility
         in the overall conduct                                               of design interventions proved to be a difficult task due to a lack of
                                                                              precedents of projects.
      Boy’s Section
      • The boys often ended up copying the given tasks from each             Application - Restorative justice
        other                                                                 Restorative Justice is focused on rehabilitation of offenders through
      • There was evident groupism, there were juveniles who were             reconciliation with the victim or community. This approach of bringing
        dominating other kids                                                 justice brings to table the damage caused because of the act of crime,
      • The language barrier was exploited by the students and made           the accountability of the action for the offender and way forward for
        fun of each other                                                     better reform. The approach focuses on reformation of the person
      • The juveniles were keen on learning “cool” things, like bike riding   to restore them as a contributing member of the society. Restorative
        and tattoo art                                                        justice is also applicable to offenders who have already been convicted.
                                                                              It seeks to understand the circumstances around the person and triggers
Reflection and analysis                                                       that lead to the act of crime and thus applying that in the reformation
Though there were different observations noted for each place that we         and eventual re-integration of the person in the society.
visited, this study helped us see some common trends across places
with respect to the behaviour of children, their interest, interaction with   One of the most effective ways of addressing restorative justice is
peers inside and the kind of things that troubled them.                       through restorative circles. A restorative circle brings together the
                                                                              three parties to a conflict – those who have acted, those directly
One of the most evident things that came across was that the children         impacted and the wider community – within an intentional systemic
inside were more inclined to learn life skills than education in formal       context, to dialogue as equals. The restorative circles practised here
sense. The children who stayed inside these observation homes were            in the observation home opens discussion among the kids. Due to the
from varied age-groups, regions and languages. For most children,             complicated and varied social structure of our society, a lot of children
earning a living was higher in priority that getting a formal education.      who are inside the observation homes have been normalised to things,
Sitting in a class and not connecting to the content made it difficult for    actions and thinking which isn’t considered okay by the larger society.
them to pursue it with interest.                                              There is a difference in understanding of right and wrong. Restorative
                                                                              circles aims to open up this discussion and make them see things from
Since they spent most of their time in a closed campus, many showed           different perspectives, bringing to the table the full picture. It aims to
great interest in some sort of physical activity. To keep the children safe   instill a sense of empathy, socio-emotional learning among the children
inside they are not allowed access to almost anything that could be           and work on how to control, express emotions.
harmful. Learning dance, exercising and sports were among the few

284                                                                                                                                                          285
Gamifying Restorative Circle                                                                                                                                                Figure 4.
A very important part of restorative justice is active participation by                                                                                                     ResQ
the juveniles who are part of the process. Unwilling participation of
the individuals involved was observed during the visits to the juvenile
homes. Repeated questions from guards and teachers saw signs of
disinterest such as; talking back, hesitation to answering questions,
sarcastic or demeaning comebacks and unwillingness to answer. This
derails counselling sessions and fails to provide preferable results in
change in behaviour of the children.

Another challenge that was seen to bring the concept of restorative
circles to observation homes was a lack of trained facilitator to
conduct one. The facilitator needs to be well versed in the method of
conducting a restorative circle and also be able to handle any difficult
situations that may arise while the circle is in session. It certainly may be
difficult to train people to conduct circles, to learn the kind of empathy
required to handle troubled children and listen to their problems
without judgement. What is much harder is to convince people to put
in the time and effort required to conduct a restorative circle. Since the
effects of a restorative circle are not immediately seen, officials do not                     The game, with slight modifications was tested in the Khanpur
see the benefits of the process. Thus the conclusion was reached that                          observation home at Ahmedabad (Figure 4). Further test plays were
the juveniles needed to be the initiators and conductors of the circle                         conducted on students of NID, who were not otherwise part of the
themselves.                                                                                    project.

One of the most compelling methods is ‘gamification’. Gamification                             ResQ
is the method of applying aspects of games; like competition, point                            ResQ attempts to provide counsellors, inexperienced in the method
scoring and rules of play; to non-related tasks. This is done so as to                         of conducting a restorative circle, a way to conduct a restorative circle,
improve productivity, or in online marketing as a strategy to ensure                           and children to be able to sustain the practice on their own without the
participation. It uses the pretext of achievement and rewards to                               need of a facilitator.
encourage the participant.
                                                                                               As in a detention restorative circle, each game is based on a certain
                                                                                Figure 3.      topic and the aim of the game is to discuss the topic, the severity of
                                                                                Gamification
                                                                                               the issue and methods to resolve it. In the game, the board holds the
                                                                                prototypes
                                                                                               counters of the players and dictates depending on the color of the
                                                                                               piece on which the counter lands what card the child gets. It helps
                                                                                               maintain the narrative from activities to reflection and not vice versa.

                                                                                               The game consists of a board with path made of 3 colors referring to
An attempt to use gamification to ensure preferable results in a prison                        the color cards – blue, orange, red and boxes noted for cards to be
setting is seen in a project by the students of Central St Martins, UK                         placed
(Figure 3). The game is loosely based on Monopoly and provides a
safe space for prison inmates to interact with their children who they                            • Cards: Blue are the activity cards, orange are the question cards
have not interacted with during their stay in prison. The game helps                                and red are the resolution cards. Also there are theme cards to
the children to let down their walls and interact with their estranged                              start off the game
and imprisoned parents. Successful tests of the game in the London                                • Counters representing the player
Prison show how the element of enjoyment and gratification can help                               • Talking stick
the participants to be genuine in their gameplay.                                                 • Points: 2 for participation, 1 for answering your turn




286                                                                                                                                                                                     287
On the board, first half of the circle ring had mostly activity card colours         see a better future for them ahead
in the tiles, the middle part had question card colours and the last              • Understanding social evils: Understanding cause and effect of
part had resolution card colours. The child has to pick up the colour               social vices and how to possibly tackle them. Giving a clear
of card of the colour of the tile on which he had landed and complete               definition of right and wrong
the task associated with it or answer the question associated with it.            • Relationship building: Building a conducive environment to
On completion, there will be an evaluation done by all the players,                 understand each other
if everyone agrees that it was a good attempt, he would get a token               • Building consensus: Voicing their opinions and build a consensus
worth 1 point.                                                                      on each topic they encounter in the game
                                                                                  • Positive thoughts: Nudging the children towards positive thinking
Participation is encouraged in the game to bring new perspectives                   where they are able to see a better future for themselves
to the table. If he offers to do the task on somebody else’s card or              • Restorative thinking: Nudges to make them able to reflect more
with somebody else, he would get participation token of 2 points.                   on their own behaviour
Participation coins ensure attention and participation from other                 • Empathy: Giving them a chance to explore multiple points of
interested players. To make sure everyone gets a chance to talk, a                  view
talking stick is introduced. Anyone who holds the stick talks and those           • A laugh: Last but not least, the game doesn’t compromise on
who wish to contribute ask for the talking stick. At the end the child with         having light-hearted activities at each turn to keep it enjoyable
the most amounts of points would win.                                               and dynamic

Conclusions                                                                    The outcome of this project is a board game, currently given to put in
When the game was introduced to the juvenile home, it garnered a               practice at the Dongri observation home and the Khanpur observation
mixed response. Even though the game mechanics were resolved, it               home. Regular feedback from the officials and teachers at the homes
took some time to get the gameplay established. Just like any other            will determine the further improvements and steps to be taken to
game a sense of competition took over soon, and the biggest challenge          improve the success of the game.
was to make the children curate the content of the conversations.

Once the game was in motion active participation was seen in all the
tasks involving physical activities. All the questions made children to
open up about a certain topic that’s when the main improvement was
seen. Especially for children who had recently joined the juvenile home,
it not only made them open about what they felt, but also helped create
a bond with the other children as they could relate to the emotions.
During these conversations the children showed regret over their
actions and the consequences of their parents were facing.

The officials also showed interest in being part of the game, and
promote conversation. While this was an emotional and thoughtful
journey for the children playing, it gave the officials insights to change
or improve the action plan for the child’s reformation. The balance of
the fun playful activities and serious nudges was much appreciated by
the officials and the children.

The game is a design practice which provides:

      • Possibility of a safe space: Where children can express themselves
        without the fear of being judged or noted
      • Story telling: Encouragement of sharing personal experiences
        and providing them with a platform to express
      • Conversation: Encouragement to add on others view and stories
      • Look ahead: Rationally looking at their past and being able to

288                                                                                                                                                     289
References

(1) Ministry of Law and Justice, India. The Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of
Children) Act, 2015. New Delhi: The Gazette of India Extraordinary (2016).
(2) Agarwal, Deepshikha. (2018). JUVENILE DELINQUENCY IN INDIA- LATEST TRENDS
AND ENTAILING AMENDMENTS IN JUVENILE JUSTICE ACT. PEOPLE: International
Journal of Social Sciences. 3. 1365-1383. 10.20319/pijss.2018.33.13651383.
(3) Inchley, J., & Currie, D. (2013). Growing up unequal: gender and socioeconomic
differences in young people’s health and well-being. Health Behaviour in School-aged
Children (HBSC) study: international report from the, 2014, 2-3.
(4) Narain, D. (1964). Growing up in India. Family process, 3(1), 127-154.
(5) Kumari, V. (2004). The juvenile justice system in India: From welfare to rights. New
Delhi: Oxford University Press.
(6) Makeright—Bags of Connection: Teaching Design Thinking and Making in Prison
to Help Build Empathic and Resilient Communities, She Ji: The Journal of Design,
Economics, and Innovation, Volume 4, Issue 1, 2018, Pages 91-110, ISSN 2405-8726,
(http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2405872617300199)
(7) Knutz, Eva & Markussen, Thomas & Desmet, Pieter & Visch, Valentijn. (2012).
Designing narrative games for a serious context.
(8) The Power of the Human Heart: Transforming Asia’s Biggest Prison https://fpmt.org/
mandala/archives/older/mandala-issues-for-1999/may/the-power-of-the-human-heart-
transforming-asias-biggest-prison/
(9) Ministry of Home Affairs, India. Crime in India Statistics, 2016. National Crime
Records Bureau (NCRB)
(10) Dick Schoech, Javier F. Boyas, Beverly M. Black & Nada Elias-Lambert (2013)
Gamification for Behavior Change: Lessons from Developing a Social, Multiuser, Web-
Tablet Based Prevention Game for Youths, Journal of Technology in Human Services,
31:3, 197-217, DOI: 10.1080/15228835.2013.812512




Acknowledgements
Many people supported us in bringing the project to this level.
We would like to specially thank Ms Panna Momaya, Mr Indrajit, Ms
Hemalee Leuva and Justice Satish Vora for taking out the time from their
busy schedules and guiding us in our information collection. We would
also like to thank Mr Bansode, the Deputy Chief Officer at Mumbai, and
Mr Mehul, the Superintendent at Khanpur, for giving us permission to
visit the Observation homes and allowing us to conduct our study. Ms
Sachi Maniar, for her support in learning about the NGO perspective.
Mr Sameer Shukla, Ms Lorraine Gamman and Mr Adam Thorpe for their
valuable insights on the academic and social viability of the project.
And lastly, Mr Praveen Nahar and Mr Sahil Thappa, for guiding us
throughout this journey.




290                                                                                        291
       Material design
       innovation: Fish
         leather, a new
      environmentally-
      friendly material
       Elisa Palomino and Gustavo Adrian Defeo
292                                         293
Abstract                                                                     knowledge exchange that will develop the capacity for research and
This paper explores the material design innovation process during            practice in these fields.
a cross-disciplinary project working with fish leather. The Fishskinlab
project aims to generate a deeper understanding of fish leather as           This design research is about innovation, design, and sustainability
an alternative to conventional leather to encourage more sustainable         paving the way for the future of fashion by using unique leftover
fashion practices. The objective is to create aesthetically relevant fish    materials such as fish skins while illustrating shifts in material values and
leather products that illuminate sustainability thinking as a driver for     resources.
innovation. The project looks at the strategies implemented by practice
in the field of material design innovation fed by new technologies,          The paper is divided into seven parts. The first part covers an introduction
addressing changes in interactions between humans and with our               to the project and main objectives. The second part examines the
environments.                                                                historical context of fish leather. The thrid part covers the environmental
                                                                             context. The fourth part describes the methodology used. The fifth part
The research draws on findings gathered through a partnership                develops the design research through practice: the Fishskinlab research
between the researcher, the Icelandic tannery Atlantic Leather and the       case study. The sixth part explores the digital printing methods used
Italian analytical laboratory Ars Tinctoria connecting fashion designers,    and chemical tests done. The final part describes the findings and
scientists and leather technicians from the UK, Italy, and Iceland to        conclusions.
advance material innovation by using new technology (water-based ink                                                                                         Figure 1. At-
digital printing methods) on fish leather. This led to the development of                                                                                    lantic leather
a collection of digitally printed fish leather bags.                                                                                                         fish skin tan-
                                                                                                                                                             nery. Picture
The skins were sourced at Atlantic leather, the researcher developed the                                                                                     by Nathalie
prints and followed the technical process while the digital printing was                                                                                     Malric (2018)
produced and tested at the Italian analytical laboratory Ars Tinctoria.
This paper presents the journey of the mapping process, illustrating the
key stages of the research, which led to the discovery of new material
properties and finishes applying digital printing processes to a food
industry by-product material such fish leather.

The methods and practices of the project included dynamic interaction
between the researchers facilitated through the cooperative framework
of the project. The feedback of the work presented during Brussels
Industry days and Milano Design week offered the researcher an
information flow that influenced the development of the final prototypes
and the ultimate presentation of process and outcomes.
The findings identify that new materials, processes, and techniques are
often the result of the successful union of fashion and technology to        Historical context
help drive the industry towards a more sustainable future.                   The use of fish skin for clothing is an ancient tradition in Arctic societies
                                                                             along rivers and coasts and there is evidence of fish skin leather
Introduction                                                                 production in Scandinavia, Alaska, Japan, northeast China and Siberia.
The project explores existing traditional knowledge of fish skin processes   Before synthetic fibres were invented, people clothed themselves
and applies the analysis of this learning using state-of-the-art practices   with natural materials available in the surroundings where they lived,
and developing new technologies while addressing specific challenges         including fish skin (Jiao, 2012).
of the use of fish leather for the fashion industry. The research maps
best practice and knowledge transfer of water-based ink digital printing     People in the Arctic coastal regions sourced their materials from animals
technologies for fish leather.                                               that were necessary for their survival, such as salmon and they used
                                                                             their skins for clothing and accessories (Hatt, 1969).
The research has brought together sustainable methods from fashion
design, material science, and analytical chemistry to foster international   The shortage of raw materials and omnipresence of modernity have
                                                                             challenged the preservation of the fish skin craft (Lin, 2007). Better
                                                                             access to the modern world meant that Arctic people were able to
294                                                                                                                                                                     295
access textiles like cotton and silk to create their clothing, leaving fewer                          was executed, how the staff was treated, the factory’s surroundings and
people to develop the traditional fish skin craft. Overfishing and water                              how the small community around the factory is benefiting from it.
pollution have caused fish stocks to drop and many Arctic aboriginals
have turned to farming to make a living, abandoning their fish skin skills                            Environmental context
(Lin, 2007).                                                                                          The fashion industry is currently going through a significant change
                                                                                                      in its approach towards sustainability and luxury brands need to think
The use of fish skin by aboriginal Arctic people has recently been                                    about the natural resources they rely on and come up with innovation on
assimilated as an innovative sustainable material for fashion due to their                            alternative sustainable materials and processes. Fashion needs to invest
low environmental impact.                                                                             in technologies able to reduce environmental impact to enhance the
                                                                                                      materials and create products that respect the environment (Pavione,
The Atlantic Leather tannery, located on the north coast of Iceland,                                  E. et al.2016)
has been one of the main agents in the renaissance of the fish skin
craft. Processing fish leather since 1994, based on the ancient Icelandic                             FishSkinLab research concentrates on promoting a new category of raw
tradition of making shoes from the skins of wolfish (Figure 2). The                                   material for fashion: fish leather. Fish skins are sourced from the food
tannery has brought this historic eco-luxury material back into fashion,                              industry, using what is now considered waste, applying the principle of
simultaneously reviving ancestral tanning techniques and providing jobs                               circular economy, combining research and innovation to enhance the
for the local community (Figure 1). Their fish leather is a by-product of                             well-being of the earth and its people through the entire life cycle of
the fishing industry, exploiting fish not bred specifically for their skin, that                      the product.
would otherwise be discarded. All the fish skin used by Atlantic Leather
is sourced from sustainably-managed farms in the Nordic countries                                     Global production of fish has steadily increased over the last decade and
(Figure 3). Special attention is given to the new technologies used on                                more than 50% of the total fish capture remaining material results in 32
their fish skin production and to address challenges such as energy,                                  million tonnes of waste. (Arvanito, Kassaveti, 2008). While to date, the
environment and climate change. The entire process of producing fish                                  European Environment Protection agency allows seafood processors to
skin at Atlantic Leather relies on the power of nature using geothermal                               dispose of fish skins in marine waters, this is expected to change as the
water and is non-impactful on the environment. The manufacturing of                                   decomposing organic waste can suck up available oxygen from marine
fish skin leather works with three aspects of sustainability: the economic                            species and introduces disease to the local ecosystem. (EPA, 2012).
benefit of creating value from waste; the social benefit of reconciling
                                                                                                                                                                                  Figure 3.
sustainability with fashionably exotic fish skin; and the environmental                                                                                                           Salmon fish
benefit of producing skins without damaging endangering animals.                                                                                                                  skins through
Atlantic leather is the winner of the “Tannery of the Year Europe                                                                                                                 the tanning
Territory 2016” award, taking in consideration how the tanning process                                                                                                            process.
                                                                                                                                                                                  Picture by
                                                                                                                                                                                  Nathalie Mal-
                                                                                   Figure 2.                                                                                      ric (2018)
                                                                                   Icelandic
                                                                                   traditional
                                                                                   shoes made
                                                                                   of wolffish skin
                                                                                   (right). Picture
                                                                                   by Nathalie
                                                                                   Malric (2018)




                                                                                                      The processing of fish leather avoids throwing the fish skins into the
                                                                                                      ocean and can significantly reduce marine pollution and sustainably
                                                                                                      protect marine ecosystems in order to achieve healthy and productive
                                                                                                      oceans. Consequently, the promotion of fish leather could be of great
                                                                                                      environmental benefit as well as profit for the coastal economy.
296                                                                                                                                                                                        297
The use of alternative materials such fish leather has the potential                                                                                      Figure 4.
not only to serve to our material needs but also reduce resource                                                                                          Fishskinlab
consumption of other over exploited materials such conventional                                                                                           project: Wis-
                                                                                                                                                          teria digital
leather and it could lead to more locally sensitive production, more
                                                                                                                                                          printed fish
regional sourced materials and more local jobs (Fletcher, 2014).                                                                                          skin clutch
By growing, sourcing and processing raw materials close to home                                                                                           by Elisa Pal-
shortens transport routes, lowers carbon footprint and increases                                                                                          omino. Photo
transparency across the supply chain. By using local industry waste                                                                                       by Giacomo
such as fish skin, nearshoring material production can provide exciting                                                                                   Iezzi (2019)
opportunities for the community whilst minimising environmental
impact, both locally and globally (Banathy, 1996).

Fish leather being recoverd as waste, requires limited resources from
the sourcing of the raw material leaving a lower carbon footprint than
the one associated with raising cattle. Fish leather requires no extra
land, water, fertilisers or pesticides to be produced and it has a lower
environmental impact than conventional leather (Jacobs, 2018).

In luxury fashion, innovation, new materials and traceability are critical.
                                                                              The research looked into demonstrating the contemporary relevance
Many luxury brands are actively researching into new materials to make
                                                                              of fish leather as a new sustainable material identifying fish skin’s
sure the next product is better than the previous one. Luxury fashion
                                                                              positive ecological impact and its potential for application in fashion.
brands in the future will be forced to view sustainability as a business
                                                                              The methods included prefiguring avenues and sketching strategies for
imperative; sustainability, in fact, represents innovation and generates
                                                                              developing new printing techniques for fish leather within the fashion
competitiveness in the global luxury marketplace (Pavione, E. et
                                                                              luxury industry.
al.2016). Any luxury brand which understand these issues and uses fish
leather will be regarded at the forefront of the developing innovative
                                                                              The methodology of this research identifies risk-taking and co-
market.
                                                                              experimentation of materials as essential strategies as the key stages of
                                                                              the research process: Mapping new terrain of sustainable materials, fish
According to Williams, new conversations about the materials that we
                                                                              leather material investigation, public feedback and critical evaluation.
choose, the products that we make, and the ways in which we work as
                                                                              This paper presents a journey of the process, illustrating the key stages
designers can be responsive and make a positive contribution to the
                                                                              of the research.
world around us as the premise of all good design. (Williams, 2013)
This research draws on the field of Design for Sustainability with
                                                                              Observational and participatory methods were utilised to obtain data.
scholars such as Stuart Walker drawing attention to design as a process
                                                                              This involved talking to the general public during the presentation
of re-consideration of the present as part of the creation of shared
                                                                              of the project at Brussels Industry days and Milano Design week.
futures (Walker,2016). Walker has suggested that when people begin to
                                                                              Feedback from the general public during the design fairs supported
appreciate the level of skill and the massive investment of time involved
                                                                              the progression of the project applying design thinking to the journey.
in making a piece, it is valued more highly. High fashion conundrum
                                                                              The key findings from the general feedback verified that the public
valuing handmade products versus low end disposable fashion are also
                                                                              would be likely to buy fish leather items as an alternative material
part of the fish leather discussion. The highly qualified skills necessary
                                                                              for fashion.The information influenced the development of the final
to produce fish leather makes it a unique luxury material for fashion.
                                                                              fish leather prototypes and the ultimate presentation of process and
                                                                              outcomes.
Methodology
A preliminary round of research was conducted to understand the
                                                                              Design research through practice: Fishskinlab research case
status of the field in terms of research coverage and gaps, and towards
a better definition of the research objectives and their scope. The
                                                                              study
                                                                              Leather remains a vital material for most luxury fashion houses, even
analysis covered studies on historical and contemporary use of fish skin,
                                                                              more so when it is an exotic skin. Thanks to the use of new technologies,
sustainability aspects and alternative digital printing methods.
                                                                              the luxury industry offers a vast array of appearances and finishes among
                                                                              conventional leather, while both the use and creative development of

298                                                                                                                                                                299
fish leather has been largely neglected. The aim of this design research     and sustainability. Both exhibitions provided an excellent opportunity
is to pilot and develop non-polluting technologies for fish leather          to engage with a diverse audience representing a variety of industrial
finishes to advance the development of future manufactured fish              sectors from all over Europe. A key element of the participation on
leather products. The results can bring a fresh look at how fish leather     the Brussels Industry days was to facilitate a venue that could inspire
development with new technologies can underpin and reshape luxury            consumers and EU policy makers to engage with materials through
fashion accessories.                                                         closed-loop thinking, to share their ideas with the designer and to
                                                                             obtain additional professional feedback. The aim of the participation
This research draws on the researcher Elisa Palomino’s experience            was to push the boundaries of material design practice to identify how
working in the fashion luxury industry back in 2002, designing for John      it can be used as a tool for citizen engagement, for both: the designer,
Galliano fish leather garments and accessories sourced at Atlantic           and the public who wished to engage with the product to identify
leather. The researcher has experience running network projects linked       opportunities to improve both its environmental and social impacts.
with fish skin (e.g. EU Horizon 2020-MSCA-RISE Marie Sklodowska
Curie: Fish Skin a Sustainable Raw Material; and she is the recipient of     The feedback outlined the successful elements of the project, the value
the UK-US Fulbright Scholar Award: ‘Arctic Fishskin clothing traditions’     of sustainability and use of waste materials and highlighted the qualities
at the Smithsonian Institute)                                                that a waste approach can bring to accessories design.

In 2018, the author collaborated with Atlantic Leather in the                The element that emerged was the close link created between the
development of ‘Fishskinlab’, a Worth Partnership Project, funded            sustainable approach and innovation. The public was surprised of how
by the European Commission, EASME, under (COSME 2014-2020)                   something that is considered waste in many countries is given a much
with access to financial funding, market exposure and mentoring to           higher value through the action of design. Seduced by its beauty, the
produce a collection of bags made of fish leather developing new             public was aware of the material being the skin of a fish and inspired
embellishments and eco-friendly digital printing which has informed          about the value of everyday materials. The high visual standards of
this practice-based research.                                                the final product fits with luxury fashion and becomes a benchmark for
                                                                             redefining the beauty of sustainability. (Figure 5) The project is a fine
Phase 1                                                                      example of an innovative way of linking the preservation of traditional
With her knowledge on textile and leather printing the main aim for          knowledge and culture and the development of relevant fashion items
the researcher was to see how fish leather would be transformed under        taking in consideration the sustainable limits of the planet’s natural
digital printing, compared with the relatively well-known process of         resources.
textile and leather digital printing. The first round of tests, as seen in
Figure 7, resulted in findings that the water-based inks did not adhere      Fish leather digital printing
easily to the fish leather when the designs had full coverage.               The researcher is an expert in the field of textile design, familiar with
                                                                             digital and analogue printing methods but there are no previous
Phase 2                                                                      attempts known to the researcher to print fish leather. There are different
The first review of the digital printed tests identified the need to         methods that could be used: silk screen printing and digital print.
expand the selection of designs to include designs with less coverage        Textile digital printing emerged in the 1990s as a prototyping tool and
(Figure 8) that could withstand the even coverage and produce new            a vehicle for printing small batches of fabric for niche-market products
results. As the author became more specific in her design choices and        (Provost, 1994). Inkjet printing involves the propelling of tiny droplets
experiment with a number of design combinations the final results were       of dye or pigment onto a fabric electrostatically. The selected dyes
very successful.                                                             or pigments are dosed on demand and avoid print paste residues at
                                                                             the end of each run and if pigmented inks are used (rather than those
Phase 3                                                                      based on dyes) no solvent which associated volatile organic compound
Prototypes of small bags were created with the print samples to              emissions is required to dissolve the colourant. (Fletcher, 2013) Recent
exemplify the materiality of fish leather for luxury fashion accessories.    decades have seen the growing popularity of preparing water-based
                                                                             ink-jet inks for textile printing.
Phase 4
The author decided that, in order to gain feedback on the project, it        Water-based ink-jet inks for digital textile printing were used on fish
would be advantageous to build in a participatory knowledge exchange.        leather for this project. Fish leather printing can be difficult since ink
In 2019 the Fishskinlab project took part in Milano Design week and          generally does not bond well to a non-uniform, organic, complex
EU Industry Days in Brussels (Figure 6) under the theme of industry          substrate. The non-uniformity and surface roughness of the fish scales

300                                                                                                                                                        301
                                                                               Figure 6.        The physical and rheological properties of the inks were measured for
                                                                               Fishskinlab      the evaluation of ink stability and suitability for ink-jet printing. The
                                                                               project: Pa-     tests were found to be suitable. The prints were subjected to light and
                                                                               goda digital
                                                                                                rub fastness tests and colour measurements. Colour consistency and
                                                                               printed fish
                                                                               skin clutch by   fastness results, especially after fixation, are comparable with those
                                                                               Elisa Palomi-    on conventional leather, which paves the way for the production of
                                                                               no. Banner for   environmentally friendly water-based ink-jet inks for the digital printing
                                                                               the Brussels     of fish leather.
                                                                               EU Industry
                                                                               days. Photo                                                                                   Figure 7.
                                                                               by Giacomo                                                                                    Non uniform
                                                                               Iezzi (2019)                                                                                  penetration
                                                                                                                                                                             of ink on
                                                                                                                                                                             the Pagoda
                                                                                                                                                                             digital print
                                                                                                                                                                             sample.




was one of the main obstacles during the process. (See Figure 7). The
significant variation on a single fish skin as well as between skins of a
batch was also a challenge. Techniques for printing on fish leather may
suppress at least one usual property of fish leather, e.g. appearance,
feel and/or absorption. Printing onto the surface of fish leather could
be disadvantageous if the ink is weakly bonded and it could be easily
removed during normal wear and tear, or if the print cracks when flexed.
(Pantelis, 2013)
                                                                                                                                                                             Figure
During the test phase, the printing of fish leather included the                                                                                                             8. Good
application of an ink base coat directly onto the surface of the fish                                                                                                        penetration
leather. The experiments show that a selected combination of pressure                                                                                                        of ink on
and temperature is required. Success was achieved when the transfer of                                                                                                       the Wisteria
ink into the fish leather occurred across the leather sample with good                                                                                                       digital print
penetration (See Figure 8). In unsuccessful tests, the transfer of ink into                                                                                                  sample.
the leather had a non-uniform penetration (See Figure 7). The digital
printing was produced and tested at the Italian analytical laboratory
Ars Tinctoria.

They are specialised in colour, light and organic analytical research.
Based in Santa Croce sull’Arno, heart of the Italian Leather production
cluster, the laboratory is equipped with the latest generation
instruments and is active in several fields, including synthesis, analytical
research and the study of molecular structures of dyes, the search for
hazardous substances, and measurement and standardization of colour
and light. Gustavo Adrián Defeo, its CEO is an industrial chemist, active
in the leather field since 1985 with multinational chemistry groups with
expertise in dyes kinetics, psychophysics, colour perception, light and
colour measurement, industrial waste recycling, ecology and analytical
methods for the leather sector.


302                                                                                                                                                                                     303
Fastness properties of wisteria digital printing                                                                                                                            Figure 10.
Fastness properties were analysed following updated ISO standards.                                                                                                          Colour
                                                                                                                                                                            fastness to
                                                                              Figure 9.                                                                                     perspiration
                                                                              Migration into
                                                                              polymeric                                                                                     Figure 11.
                                                                              materials                                                                                     Xenon arc
                                                                                                                                                                            fading lamp
                                                                                                                                                                            test




ISO 15701:2015 (IULTCS/IUF 442) Leather - Colour fastness to migration                         Results shown the absence of any substance of concern, such as
into polymeric material (for this test migration was tested on standard                        Aromatic amines derived from Azo dyestuffs, Hexavalent Chrome (Cr
PVC layers: This test helps to understand if there will be potential                           VI), Reach Annex XIV and Annex XVII listed Phthalates, Alkyl phenol
colour migration into plastic materials, and eventual stain of polymeric                       and Alkyl phenol ethoxylates, Free formaldehyde and Chlorophenols.
finishings applied, by contact with neighbouring materials.
Results obtained which can be observed on Figure 9 were excellent                              Conclusions
(rate 4,5 /5 on grey scale, where the value 5 represents the highest                           This paper portrays the journey of a collaborative research project
standard). Such a result allows combining the print obtained with any                          between the authors Elisa Palomino, designer, educator and researcher
other neighbouring material without risk of stains.                                            at BA Fashion Print at Central Saint Martins and Gustavo Adrian
                                                                                               Defeo, industrial chemist CEO at Ars Tinctoria. The project started as
ISO 11641:2012 (IULTCS/IUF 426) Leather - Colour fastness to                                   an open-ended research investigation combining design with science
perspiration (on multifibre): This test was developed to understand                            and technology exploring fish leather material testing in the hope to
eventual colour fading or migration into different textile fibres with                         develop new finishes and techniques.
artificial acidic perspiration (Figure 10). A multifibre fabric composed,
from the top, of Acetate, Cotton, Polyester, Acrylic and Wool was used                         Material research has rapidly expanded into a more interdisciplinary
in this test.                                                                                  practice and designers need to broaden the disciplines in which the
                                                                                               methods and concepts of sustainable materials are taken as a vehicle
A part of a light stain on Acetate (rated 4/5), all fibre types showed                         for new collaborative ways of making. This paper suggests methods and
excellent performance. Also in this case staining was rated against grey                       processes to invite more sustainable material research and investigates
scale where perfect values are represented by rate 5.                                          how knowledge about materials can be integrated and communicated
                                                                                               within the framework of research.
The final test was ISO 105-B02:2013 Textiles - Tests for colour fastness
- Part B02: Colour fastness to artificial light: Xenon arc fading lamp                         Current research is now looking into the development of low
test: This test emulates weathering of a colour sample by exposition to                        environmental impact processes to offer new sustainable production
natural solar light. In this case samples’ colour fading is rated against a                    methods for the fashion industry. More than ever before the task of
blue scale on fabrics representing the values 1 to 8, where rate 8 is the                      design is to articulate the right directions in material development to
highest standard. The light fastness obtained (Figure 11) is > 6, which is                     move towards more sustainable choices.
an excellent result considering the naturality of the finishing.
                                                                                               Understanding materials, production processes, viability, and desirability
Chemical tests                                                                                 are key to the fashion industry. New materials and techniques are often
Wisteria printing on Salmon leather was analysed to verify the eventual                        the result of the successful union of fashion and technology to help
presence of Substances of Very High Concern (SVHC) after European                              drive the industry real change in terms of sustainability.
REACh protocols.

304                                                                                                                                                                                   305
The Fishskinlab project was designed to experiment with new                    from the transferring of the bio-digital printing results and technology.
techniques, generate a deeper understanding of the fish leather                Practice-based academics from fashion higher education and fashion
processes and open up further opportunities for research with other            designers will benefit from the new possibilities for visual and physical
disciplines.                                                                   attributes for fish leather for the purpose of creating a rich library of
                                                                               effects relevant for the fashion industry.
This project wants to bring more attention to urgent international
matters such as sustainability in the leather industry by using nature-        From a research perspective, this project has enabled the work of the
given resources and upcycling leftovers from the food industry. The            researcher as Fashion Print pathway leader at UAL, to inform future
paper reflects ethical values linked to research on sustainability and         design for sustainability practices in industry and education.
renewable sources, destined to become the driving force for the future
of high-quality fashion.

The paper outlines an investigation between design and chemistry and
the space in between them.

The potential use of water-based ink jet printing for the production of
environmentally friendly fish leather prints was investigated. The results
were excellent, and this paves the way to challenge more manufactories
to sustainable and innovative visions in existing production processes.
We were able to measure challenges and possibilities of a design
framework based on sustainability values.

The project has enhanced the creativity and innovation in the UK
and Italy’s leather sector, building stronger connections between the
researchers and creating opportunities for future exchange. The fashion
creative industries are critical to industrial and commercial success in the
UK and Italy. This Anglo-Italo-Icelandic network has blended the skills
of Italian leather technology and their passion to create high-quality
products with Icelandic sustainable technology and British cutting-edge
sustainable design.

The project will have an economic impact by putting fish skin leather on
a new level of excellence capable of conquering new markets globally.
By bringing the field of fashion design from Arts and Humanities in
contact with Science and Technology, this project has the potential
to bring benefits to a wide range of subject areas. It will encourage
the joint development of scholarship and collaboration across these
disciplines, and it will support the cross-referencing of methods to
advance scientific and artistic knowledge of fish leather as a more
sustainable alternative to conventional leather.

The outcomes of this project will enable an informed discourse on
sustainable thinking for creative practitioners, fashion designers, fashion
students, leather manufacturers of luxury goods and retailers across a
broad contemporary landscape.

The research developed in this project will benefit scientists coming
from a polymer and chemical backgrounds from the research know-
how in transforming fish skin, a biological residue, into fish leather – a
workable raw material. Chemical scientist at the tanneries will benefit
306                                                                                                                                                        307
References                                                                                     Acknowledgements
                                                                                               Professor Dilys Williams, Director Centre for Sustainable Fashion
Arvanito, I. Kassaveti. A. (2008) Fish industry waste: treatments, environmental impacts,      at London College of Fashion and Simon Thorogood, Senior
current and potential uses. International Journal of Food Science and Technology 43,           Research Fellow Digital Anthropology Lab at London College of
726–745.
                                                                                               Fashion, provided overall guidance for this research. The research
Atlantic Leather. Available at http://www.atlanticleather.is/thestory/ (Accessed 21            has been funded by Arts and Humanities Research Council (AHRC)
September 2018 )
                                                                                               LDoc London Doctoral Design Centre Award, the EU Horizon
Banathy, H.B. (1996). Designing Social Systems in a Changing World. New York: Plenum           2020-MSCA-RISE-2018. Research and Innovation Staff Exchange
Press.
                                                                                               Marie Sklodowska Curie GRANT NUMBER 823943: FishSkin:
Ehrman, E. (2018) Fashioned from Nature. London: V&A publishers.                               Developing Fish Skin as a Sustainable Raw Material for the Fashion
EPA. Environmental Protection Agency. (2012) Ocean Disposal of Fish Wastes. The                Industry and the Worth Partnership Project: Fish leather in the Luxury
2012 guidelines. Available at: https://www.epa.gov/ocean-dumping/oceandisposal-
                                                                                               Industry, funded by European Commission, EASME, under (COSME
fish-wastes (Accessed 16 Octobre 2018)
                                                                                               2014-2020). The authors would like to express their gratitude to the
Fletcher, K. (2013) Sustainable Fashion and Textiles, Design Journeys. Routledge
                                                                                               Icelandic tannery Atlantic Leather.
Hatt, G. (1969) Arctic skin clothing in Eurasia and America an ethnographic study.
University of Wisconsin Press
Jacobs, B. (2018) The future of leather is plant-based. HowNow Magazine Available
at: https://www.hownowmagazine.com/innovation/2018/6/22/the-future-of-leather-is-
plantbased (Accessed 04th November 2018)
Jiao, F (2012) Keeping the Legend of the Fish Skin Tribe Alive. Available at: http://www.
chinatoday.com.cn/ctenglish/se/txt/2012-02/02/content_423289.htm (Accessed 04th
November 2018)
Kering 2025 Strategy Crafting Tomorrow’s Luxury. Available at: http://www.kering.com/
en/sustainability/2025-strategy (Accessed 04th April 2019).
Lin, Q (2007) Look who’s tipping the scales in favour of skinny suits. Available at: http://
www.chinadaily.com.cn/cndy/2007-07/10/content_5422759.htm.              (Accessed      04th
November 2018)
Pavione, E. Pezzetti, R. Dall’Alva, M. (2016) Emerging Competitive Strategies in the
Global Luxury Industryin the Perspective of Sustainable Development: the Case of
Kering Group. University of Insubria
Pantelis, Y. (2013) Leather Printing. Application.
Provost, J, (1994) Inkjet Printing on Textiles. Surface Coatings International.
Walker, S. (2006) Sustainable By Design. London: Earthscan
Williams, D. (2018) Fashion, Sustainability and Luxury: an interplay through design.
Palgrave Macmillan.
Williams, D (2013) The Making of a Social Object: Collaboration between Nike and
Centre for Sustainable Fashion. In: Sustainable Fashion: New Approaches. Aalto
University, Helsinki, Finland, pp. 164-173. ISBN 978-952-5572-5




308                                                                                                                                                                     309
                     Wearing your
                     recovery: 3.0
      Laura Salisbury, Chris McGinley and Rama Gheerawo
310                                                  311
Abstract                                                                                       the use of objects as ‘platforms for care’. Methods of visualising the
People frequently use clothing to highlight, erase, identify and even                          post stroke body span from the use of garments to embody experience
‘correct’ parts of their bodies, using clothing as a means of slimming,                        and behaviour, to the use of body scanning (Figure 1) in order to
sculpting or shaping. What are the implications of this phenomena                              meticulously analyse the differential behaviours between the affected
when our bodies do not function as they might have previously done?                            and unaffected limb, and that of the garment. By envisaging textiles
This paper asks how garments can build on their inherent qualities that                        as a route to achieve a ‘second skin’ that works in parallel with us, the
impact behaviour, mood and function of the body, to question and                               internal body becomes extended beyond inherited forms and moves
position the role clothing might play on some of the major issues with                         into that of another non-typical form, thus disrupting the course of
upper limb stroke rehabilitation to date; specifically motor training of                       recovery.
the upper limb.
                                                                                               Garments are both functional and expressive objects which hold the
When stroke disrupts the ability to use our finer motor control within our                     ability to move with and be in direct contact with the human body
hands, activities of daily life (ADLs) that enable us to live our lives and                    throughout prolonged periods of the day and night. When considered
frequently participate in become affected. Clinicians are acknowledging                        in relation to needs for motor training, which Wade identifies as
the importance of self-administered care saying ‘it’s not what happens                         needing to increase in intensity by 240% (2017) in order to meet
when we are there, but what happens when we are not there [that is                             guidelines set out by the Royal College of Physicians (2016), garments
crucial]’ (Kings 2017). Yet patients are having trouble self-administering                     provide incredible opportunities to support developments in stroke
rehabilitation, often having to prioritize training over other aspects of                      rehabilitation. On one level, an opportunity arises if we think in terms
their life which can affect mood. It is the position of the authors that                       of frequency and consistency of performing physiotherapy, opening up
quality of life should not be reduced in order to get ‘better’, especially                     alternative methods to do this, such as with guidance (via the textile)
when recovery can take many months or even years.                                              within public contexts. Yet further qualities of the garment, including its
                                                                                               tactility are considered within this paper, which become useful when we
Introduction                                                                                   consider how learning, behavior and thus re-wiring, or ‘recovery’ occurs
Using a materials approach in research through design as a particular                          post stroke. The multi-sensory role of the textile in these contexts are
way of thinking (Frayling 2015) and by thinking through the making                             considered, along with the implications of the garment occupying this
process (Ingold 2017), ‘Wearing Your Recovery’ presents a response                             space.
to work conducted concrescently and directly with stroke survivors and
‘care-givers’ to offer a post-critique of the implications and opportunities                   This research questions how design can extend support to deliver the
of using textiles as platforms for care.                                                       needs identified in stroke literature and clinical guidelines, and further
                                                                                               consider the extended emotional needs, through the considered
                                                                               Figure 1.       implications of use of types of tools and approaches within the highly
                                                                               ‘Under De-
                                                                                               diverse lifestyles of individuals who have suffered a stroke. A number
                                                                               velopment’:
                                                                               Visualising     of insights gained from phase 1 of the ongoing research are included,
                                                                               the body post   developing a conversation as to whether rehabilitation is a pursuit for all
                                                                               stroke: Body    or whether there comes a time when individuals choose to no
                                                                               Scans; RCA.     longer participate. Why is this? And what could the re-positioning and
                                                                                               re-thinking of methods of rehabilitation do to become more inclusive
                                                                                               to a diverse audience, through understanding emotional needs and
                                                                                               purposes in life. To unpack this, garments were used as design tools
                                                                                               within workshops conducted over a one-year period (Figure 2).

                                                                                               Within the following paper garments are used both as a tool for
                                                                                               understanding experience, identity, behaviours and emotions of
                                                                                               stroke survivors, support workers and clinicians as a research method.
                                                                                               Additionally this use is extended and identified as a tool for re-thinking
                                                                                               rehabilitation. As such, three concepts are presented to detail early
                                                                                               explorations within the research.
Samples in this paper unpack the moments of ‘thinking through making’
and examine the difference between the role of the ‘care-provider’ and

312                                                                                                                                                                          313
                                                                            Figure 2. The   so begin to live lives that are not in line with their personality, behaviour
                                                                            garment as a    and identity. The time taken to participate in rehabilitation detracts from
                                                                            research tool   rebuilding one’s life which is perhaps best summed up in the following
                                                                            (Headway,
                                                                                            quote:
                                                                            2018; 2019).

                                                                                               “I do have a life outside of rehabilitation you know, life does
                                                                                               exist outside of rehabilitation.”
                                                                                               Patient quote in 6 week follow-up appointment - Observation
                                                                                               study: 3 week Upper Limb Programme, Queen Square, London
                                                                                               25/01/2018
                                                                                                                                                                            Figure 3. A
                                                                                                                                                                            Visualisation
                                                                                                                                                                            of Synergies
                                                                                                                                                                            and Spas-
                                                                                                                                                                            ticity in the
                                                                                                                                                                            Upper Limb:
                                                                                                                                                                            UCL Partners
                                                                                                                                                                            (Krakauer,
                                                                                                                                                                            2018).



The stroke context
Post stroke, approximately 87% of survivors experience upper limb
paresis (Parker, Wade, Langton Hewer, 1986 in Conforto et al. 2018).
This ‘loss’ becomes worsened by non-use. Learned ‘non-use’ occurs
due to the brain’s association as a ‘use-it-or-lose-it’ organ (Doidge
2016, p.86). Within the context of stroke, neuroplastician, Edward
Taub discovered that patients ‘learn’ not to use their affected arm
thus relying on their functioning arm instead, compensating for what
they had lost by finding ways around tasks. As a result of this learned
‘non-use’ muscles begin to weaken. Some individuals experience the
emergence of synergies and spasticity (Figure 3). Jackson and Walsh
suggest the dual nature of hemiplegia is a combination of the loss of                       It is further suggested that current approaches to rehabilitation often
voluntary movement due to damage to the cortex, and an intrusion                            emphasise the success of task function over the quality of movement
of positive phenomena that we call spasticity and synergy. Synergies                        that is achieved (Krakauer, 2018). A study conducted by Murata et al.
are generated from the co-activation of muscles despite an attempt                          (2008) establishes the importance in distinguishing between quality of
at single point movement, making it difficult to move the limb in the                       movement and success of the task in therapy. It is known that if quality
desired way. To improve this, one must use the limb, and so a greater                       movements are emphasised with a large amount of practice, there are
focus is placed upon the active self. However, observational studies                        dramatically time dependent improvements (Krakauer, 2018). Some of
mapping patient isolation in hospitals following a stroke conducted in                      the major barriers that can prevent this are lack of resources, an increase
2005 (De Wit et al.) and again in May 2017 (Chouliara et al.), found                        in the demand for assistance from highly trained specialists (Belforte
that patients spend around a third of their day sleeping and lying with                     et al. 2007), fatigue and lack of motivation by stroke survivors which
no activity. This highlights a desperate need to re-think methods to                        may result in the use of compensatory techniques or complete non-
support rehabilitation at an early stage, especially when we consider                       use of the limb. The development of games and VR (e.g. Neuroball
findings from Biernaskie, Chernenko and Corbett (2004) and Zeiler et al.                    and GripAble) incorporating rehabilitation have attempted to address
(2016) who have identified a postischemic sensitive period, showing a                       motivational decline in the participation of training, as well as some
correlation between increased levels of recovery and earlier re-training.                   providing guidance via a virtual therapist. Yet such approaches are not
                                                                                            universal and have a limited attraction to a specific demographic of
This need to persistently train with constant exercise is unfamiliar to                     people. Haptic robots combined with gaming in SMARTS II (Krakauer,
many who have not exercised to such levels of intensity pre-stroke and                      2018) are seen to be breaking ground for training quality movements in
314                                                                                                                                                                                   315
the future of stroke rehabilitation. All of these concepts retain the static   procedure.’ (O’Leary (2019). Hence a group of neurons will be used
and the situated nature of therapy, which is often held in the confines of     for different purposes at different times, but just how might a textile
a therapy room. This provokes the question-, what methods can we use           respond to such behaviour and help support learning to move once
as an extension of this, to impact the everyday routines of life, beyond       again?
private settings, whilst considering the impact of consistent training?
                                                                               As behaviour post-stroke directly affects the course of recovery, it was
Approach                                                                       essential to understand the varying levels of experiences of individuals
It is argued that designers now have a responsibility to ensure that such      that shape their behaviours. This was captured within a three-phase
products and services ‘fit into everyday life’ (Fitzpatrick in Moller and      approach; firstly, by using garments as tools for the exchange and
Kettley, 2017), when it comes to stroke rehabilitation, the importance of      embodiment of experience (Figure 2); secondly, a digital analysis and
this cannot be overstated. The need for ‘participation’ and promotion          documentation of the post stroke body using body scanning (Figure 1);
of self-efficacy for using devices or even simply being involved in self-      and finally, supplementing this with raw film to capture movement and
administered training could not be stronger (Ward, 2018). By using the         responses to textile prototypes ‘in the moment’ (a still from a film can
intuitive nature of garments, in their ability to work with movements          be seen in figure 4).
and behaviour of the wearer in a manner that works alongside everyday                                                                                      Figure 4.
activities, encouraging or supporting the use of the limb.                                                                                                 Knowledge
                                                                                                                                                           exchange
Hence one begins to question the potential of utilising a garment as a                                                                                     through the
‘platform for care’ by investigating the extent of material agency over                                                                                    act of wear-
human ability as the garment enables the routine nature of rehabilitation                                                                                  ing (Head-
                                                                                                                                                           way, 2019).
to be embedded into the routines of the everyday.

The rise of smart materials and their extension of intelligence from
passive states acting as sensors to their environment, to active states
in being able to respond back to the environment and additionally
being able to ‘learn’ and adapt to context and circumstance (Zhang
2001 in Langenhove et al. 2007), provides opportunity to re-evaluate
function and form of our bodies. Within garments we may observe
continual states of reaction and dialogue between the self and the
garment. Whether behaviour is resisted, through irritation of seams,
surface texture and similar, or embraced, there exists a feedback loop         The use of toiles (Figure 4) aimed to provoke and question the
throughout the time of wear. The entanglement of self and garment              implications and opportunities of wearing textiles that alter or disrupt
through the constant participation of contact shows intimate influence         the movement of our bodies. Or alternatively, of supporting or aiding
of a material with the body. Throughout time, and through continued            movement. Bodily reactions and responses were captured via raw
use, our garments become ‘records of lived experience’ (Sampson                film footage. The ‘feeling of what happens’ becomes captured in the
2018); carried with us through different contexts, situations, time, space     moment (Damasio 2000).
and place. They have the ability to comfort, protect, conceal and, or
present ourselves.                                                                “This is just calling me at the minute. I don’t know why... I like
                                                                                  how it moves. There’s so many ways this thing moves. It’s like a
Learning is a critical element in the process of rehabilitation. O’Leary          spring isn’t it? Knowing what it does, brings a tear to my eye. I
explains how, as learning occurs, the amount of neurons involved in               don’t know why I’m crying but I am. Probably because [pause] it
achieving the activity increases. New branches between neurons are                can help me.”
created and thus the area of the brain increases in mass (Johansen-               Anonymous participant (“A”), Headway East London, 2019.
Berg, 2019). Learning is not necessarily a simple repetitive process, but
one that becomes constantly adapted and refined through enhanced               Deleuze discusses the composition of forces that make up the body
experience. Throughout the day, each mental act use ‘slightly different        which renders it capable of forming dialogue with other bodies,
combinations of neurons communicate with one another. Thus, as                 those which are both human and non-human (Buchanan, 1997). The
a person goes through the day, their brain is forming, informing,              embodied experience within the process of wearing clothes is inherently
and reforming new neuronal networks as part of its basic operating             ‘fleshy’ (Ruggerone 2017) and a felt experience, taking on notions of the
                                                                               philosophical sub-discipline of Aesthetics. Aesthetics, not restricted in
316                                                                                                                                                                  317
the more common sense of the word, to the visible alone, but relative                           Findings
to the other senses including the tactile, the felt. For the bodies are,                        The use of the body within active and passive states in rehabilitation
as Ruggerone suggests, ‘clusters of connections between a variety                               are often thought of in isolation to the garments that exist on the body.
of material and immaterial elements: molecules, neurons, cells but                              Except in cases where they are used as tools to practice dressing in
also ideas, signs, cultural symbols etc.’ all of which constantly impact                        occupational therapy, or as compression suits/socks or gloves (Figure 6)
the ‘affective potential’ of the body, and so through encounters, the                           to provide musculoskeletal support, control oedema or increase sensory
body ‘becomes’.The act of ‘becoming’ can be experienced through                                 and proprioceptive feedback. These are synonymously difficult to use,
the dialogue with our clothes or with objects that we wear. ‘Person A’                          due to their difficulty to dress in, and can often be uncomfortable. Saebo
wears a shoulder support that enables their body to become fulfilled                            and others offer finger extension rehabilitation gloves which aim to
to a greater capacity. The act of wearing it, over time, becomes second                         improve precision grip yet look most un-human. This may be appealing
nature as ‘Person A’ describes the feeling of it becoming unnoticeable                          to some, yet the clear visibility of wires, battery packs and ‘hardwear’
and lost to thought. That is, until someone draws attention towards it                          that also exist in FES devices, can draw attention to the existence of
through conversation.                                                                           disability and present the body as being different to others, causing the
                                                                               Figure 5. From   attraction of the gaze and questions, as ‘Person A’ described earlier.
                                                                               fMRI to Body     Furthermore, the use of the glove as the type of wearable, is one that
                                                                               Scanning;        has a distinct existence within particular social and seasonal contexts.
                                                                               The body as a    Take this out of context and this additionally adds to public speculation
                                                                               research tool:   of one’s identity and ability. Not least, to mention the striking ‘fleshy’
                                                                               RCA.             colour of the glove, which seeks to conceal itself with the ‘natural make
                                                                                                up’ of the skin of this particular individual, yet by doing so, becomes
                                                                                                ever more ‘unnatural’. Perhaps there is a balance to be gained between
                                                                                                the ‘hyperreal’ and the ‘hyper unreal’, as seen in Pullin’s ‘Hands of X’
                                                                                                (Pullin, 2019). We see as a result, the element of choice is generated
                                                                                                for the wearer to weigh up the advantages of wearing on their recovery
                                                                                                versus the emotional stigma that may be involved.
                                                                                                                                                                               Figure 6.
                                                                                                                                                                               Oedema
                                                                                                                                                                               glove (given
                                                                                                                                                                               to ‘Person
                                                                                                                                                                               C’: stroke
                                                                                                                                                                               survivor)
Physical disability, just like cognitive disability (if one were to separate
the two), can be hidden. ‘Person A’ chooses to conceal the shoulder
support and even, not wear it at all in order to resist people questioning
why they are wearing it. The ability to distinguish a wearable aid to
our clothing can affect mood, through the recollection of disability, and
affect the choice to wear it or not. Such embodied encounters ‘make up
the material texture of our daily practices’ (Ruggerone, 2017); practices
which are continuous. Through movement we ‘become’, and therefore                               This particular line of enquiry examines the role that a garment could
a stifling or lack of movement stifles or restricts our ‘becoming’;                             play, by incorporating function into familiar forms, using yarn behaviour
restricting the potential to live life. In order to visualise movement and                      to accommodate this and in doing so evaluating the relationship
function required, in line with the physical placement on the body and                          between the nature of garments to be able to restrict movement as well
the visualisation of this, body scanning was used (Figure 5). The act of                        as enhance, extend or even navigate movements. The functionality is
looking and of making, was not limited to the maker onto the user, but                          contained within the yarn and the type of weave, knit and colour can all
enabled the user to look and make onto their own body, thus providing                           be changed according to personal preference, within the parameters of
an opportunity for further self-reflection; bringing the notion of ‘going                       particular types of textile structure which is seen to affect the efficiency
for a scan’ to a whole new context.                                                             of function of the garment.




318                                                                                                                                                                                      319
The research therefore questions how can garments change the way we                         CIMT is a method which works by restricting the use of the unaffected
move in real time and the way we respond to particular types of stimuli?                    limb in order to force the affected limb to be used. The ‘good’ arm
In this way, the study asks how can we work with the natural behaviours                     becomes ‘cast’ into a splint, in order to prevent its use, and thus force
of the individual and aim to support, guide or even influence routine                       the individual to use their affected arm instead and found that this
actions that may not be obtainable through current states of ability.                       technique can work even many years post-stroke. Brain scans showed
Is it possible to relieve the pressure of keeping up with rehabilitation                    that during this treatment, neurons adjacent to the injury began to
training and thus change the quality of life during this period of time,                    take over from the damaged or dead neurons thus redirecting the
which for some remains with them for the rest of their lives.                               behaviour around other existing architecture in the brain. Methods of
                                                                                            achieving restraint are seen in forms that often restrict the individual
Within the following samples, a garment’s participation of embodied                         from performing this method beyond the confines of a private room; a
experience is extended, beyond the emotional connection we may have                         mitt, for example, is used to anchor the arm down to the table in a study
with our clothes, our capacity to integrate with objects that surround                      conducted by Kwakkel, Veerbeek, Van Wegen and Wolf (2015). As such,
us becomes one of supporting and guiding the movements we intend                            the body not only becomes associated with the tool for rehabilitation
to perform. Understanding garments which ‘negotiate internal and                            but surrounding objects within the room as well; the table in this case.
external realities’ (Winnicott 1953; 1971; 1989) via the physical change                    Where this may have been used purely to achieve the task of restraining
in shape and form to the more subtle provocations elicited through the                      the unaffected limb, the series of experiments below consider the
emittance of stimuli.                                                                       integration of this on a moving body, into public spaces.

CIMT                                                                                        Samples shown here began to investigate the interpretation of this
The first experiment explores the integration of a known and perhaps                        theory by using yarn which holds the capacity to shrink (Figure 7 and 8)
controversial rehabilitation technique, Constraint-induced movement                                                                                                     Figure 9.
therapy (CIMT), within a familiar form that is ‘used’ everyday. Where                                                                                                   Stills display-
complex individual cases are seen throughout the rehabilitation                                                                                                         ing the em-
process, which may not only be affected by their medical condition and                                                                                                  bodiment of
other associated conditions, but other variables including geographical                                                                                                 the concept
location of residence, family and lifestyle status, techniques that may                                                                                                 into a jacket:
                                                                                                                                                                        A concept
seem controversial and ineffective to one person may be life changing
                                                                                                                                                                        film, RCA
for another. It is for this reason that a range of approaches have been                                                                                                 (Salisbury &
included in this study.                                                                                                                                                 Raczynska,
                                                                                                                                                                        2018)
                                                                           Figure 7. The
                                                                                                                                                                        Above: the
                                                                           process of
                                                                                                                                                                        process of
                                                                           shrinking:
                                                                                                                                                                        contraction
                                                                           contraction of
                                                                                                                                                                        occurring;
                                                                           form: Eurecat,
                                                                                                                                                                        Below: the
                                                                           Barcelona.
                                                                                                                                                                        jacket.

                                                                           Figure 8.
                                                                           Post Shrink:
                                                                           Eurecat, Bar-
                                                                           celona.




320                                                                                                                                                                                321
and therefore restrain and restrict movement in the limb by reducing the                       how might the shape of a garment provoke particular movements? In
sleeve’s circumference. Within the concept film (Figure 9) this method                         particular, how might the change in behaviour, when transitioned from a
is displayed at a full scale through its incorporation into a sleeve of a                      flexible, free-flowing form to a more rigid, less flexible form, provoke or
jacket. The jacket’s visual composition was created purposely for the                          disrupt a particular movement, by drawing attention towards the ‘error’
film to exaggerate the change in behaviour of the textile, as well as                          made by the individual. Would that enable them to recognize and
giving a nod towards the flamboyant personality of ‘Person C’ and their                        ‘correct’ or attempt to correct such movement? How does this affect
pre-stroke career. The textile tightens its ‘hold’ on the body, effectively                    the experience of the garment and thus the mood of the individual?
‘inflicting’ a behaviour upon the body - rather than working with it, it                                                                                                     Figure
works against it. The tightening can cause some discomfort (‘Person C’,                                                                                                      11. Early
2019) but this can be controlled; either at source, through the controlled                                                                                                   Examination
emittance and distribution of heat (seen later in ‘Isolating Stimulus’); or                                                                                                  of Material
by altering the textile composition. Figure 10 displays three alternative                                                                                                    Composi-
compositions: by adding elastane or spacer yarns like wool means that                                                                                                        tion for its
the tactility is softened, the rigidity becomes dispersed through the                                                                                                        Deformation
                                                                                                                                                                             using Heat:
textile. Whilst the wool ‘softens’ the surface, the use of elastane can
                                                                                                                                                                             Polypro-
generate a degree of stretch, reducing the overall rigidity of the textile                                                                                                   pylene and
and allowing for some ‘ease’. Where the ease can affect the degree of                                                                                                        Nylon Mono-
restriction imposed by the textile on the body, this can be controlled                                                                                                       filament:
enough to facilitate comfort by not completely restricting the movement                                                                                                      Eurecat,
in the arm whilst retaining hold of the limb in a particular position. The                                                                                                   Barcelona.
main purpose of CIMT is to prevent the use of the ‘unaffected’ limb
and encourage the use of the ‘affected’ limb. This does not necessarily
mean that movement in the ‘unaffected’ limb has to be totally reduced,
but reduced enough so that it is not used.
                                                                              Figure 10.
                                                                              Left to right:
                                                                              with elastane,                                                                                 Figure 12.
                                                                              with polypro-                                                                                  Freeing the
                                                                              pylene, pure                                                                                   limb via
                                                                              Pemotex:                                                                                       alterations
                                                                              Eurecat, Bar-                                                                                  in garment
                                                                              celona.                                                                                        construction:
                                                                                                                                                                             Eurecat,
                                                                                                                                                                             Barcelona.




                                                                                               The use of nylon monofilament was initially used as a ‘support’ or
                                                                                               ‘skeleton’, utilising its properties and ability to also be manipulated
                                                                                               by heat to ‘support’ the deformation of form (Figure 11 and 12).
                                                                                               However, the adaptation of its inherently linear form, to a coiled form
                                                                                               instead, may manipulate this further, enhancing its ability to expand
                                                                                               and contract (Haines et al. 2016; Haines et al. 2014). Baughman’s work
                                                                                               presents opportunities where the process of construction can provide
Navigating movement                                                                            strength to a material, changing its behaviour, and therefore ability to
Where CIMT may force the affected limb to be used, this does not                               support the human body. When this is applied to this line of enquiry,
necessarily mean that compensatory strategies are not used. In this                            we may see the establishment of ‘soft robotic garments’ or ‘soft skins’
series of samples, we ask how we might use the garment to navigate                             (Figure 13). The use of heat within this study aimed to explore the
movement away from compensation, towards ‘quality’ movements. So                               potential of working with the thermal torsio effect (Haines et al. 2016)
                                                                                               - where an increase in temperature causes the reversible untwisting of
322                                                                                                                                                                                    323
                                                                            Figure 13.                                                                                     Figure 14.
                                                                            Leverage of                                                                                    Visualising
                                                                            form: Tests to                                                                                 movement:
                                                                            understand                                                                                     Eurecat,
                                                                            the structural                                                                                 Barcelona.
                                                                            requirements
                                                                            of the ribbon
the fiber due to the fiber having greater radial thermal expansion than     to affect the
axial thermal expansion properties. Thus the study is interested in the     base textile:
use of heat to manipulate form and function of ‘smart polymers’ such        Eurecat, Bar-
as nylon monofilaments amongst others (Baughman, 1996; Shahinpoor           celona.
et al. 1998; Pelrine et al. 2000; Shahinpoor & Kim, 2001; Brochu & Pei,
2010).

In other studies the combined use of smart fabrics and pneumatic
actuators may have seen the rise of pneumatic artificial muscles which
are deemed to provide an alternative and even reduce cost and strain
on the lack of resource associated with 1:1 In-clinic physiotherapy
(Belforte et al. 2007). Their ease of installation as well as lower
maintenance requirements and ability to operate ‘without the need for                        success in achieving a task; which is often the focus of rehabilitation;
electrical signals [thus] eliminating electromagnetic interference that                      to the affective feeling and the emotional impact of ‘becoming’ as
may be experienced’ (Belforte et al. 2007) is certainly an advantage. Yet                    a result of participating. The impact of free movement, rather than
in comparison to emerging work with thermal torsio effect, pneumatic                         being restricted on how one moves. The restriction on the quality of
actuators are more complex and challenging to integrate into smaller-                        movement can impact the ‘capacity that a body has to form specific
diameter fibers (Haines et al. 2016).                                                        relations’ (Buchanan 1997, 80) with others. As discussed previously
                                                                                             in section 2, it becomes important to consider the appearance of the
Isolating and controlling the stimulus                                                       textile its visibility to the mind of the wearer, and that of the public.
Where we may want to control the degree of deformation and                                   Where is this textile worn? The scope of the paper isn’t enough to cover
reformation of material form, we may choose to apply the textile in                          this in detail but this cannot be ignored.
particular areas of the garment. This may be done by methods of
panelling (Figure 14) or alternatively by isolating behaviours within the                    Within the series of experiments investigating the impact of structural
textile itself. This choice can have implications on the visual aesthetic                    changes on the ability to navigate movement of the body, the
of the garment. Choosing to control the changes in behaviour of the                          implications of function within the textile can be seen to affect the
textile means that one must consider how this might be achieved. Here                        surrounding shape and therefore silhouette of the garment (Figure
we explore a number of experiments which strive to incorporate yarns                         14), deformation (Figure 15) as well as the structure of the textile itself
which are able to conduct heat and electricity into the textile, thus                        (Figure 16) but may also be rendered invisible by its integration into
using electrical stimuli to ‘deliver’ heat to areas where the conductive                     the familiar structure of the textile (Figure 17). The visualisation of
yarn is placed. In addition, our clothing can both restrict or encourage                     movement in a garment which isn’t a result of the forces of the human
engagement in activities as well as limiting or expanding the ability                        body (creases, fall, folds etc.) but as a result of the responsive forces
to form relationships with others. Just as the function of the textile is                    of the textile itself (Figures 18, 19, 20) can be considered unusual and
important in the process of care, so is the aesthetic connection with                        unfamiliar to the experience and observation of wearing clothes. This
the individual; enabling connections to be built, life to be lived and a                     may therefore highlight an added difference between the body of the
quality of life to be improved.                                                              stroke survivor and those who have not suffered a stroke who therefore
                                                                                             do not need to wear clothes that support function.
      “Brain injury changes you - you have to relearn yourself all over
      again. And I really didn’t want to be a new person at 42.”                             The integration of function into familiar form (Figure 17) seems to
      Annonymous Participant: Stroke Survivor Headway,13/07/2018                             provide an option which becomes more inclusive in enable stroke
                                                                                             survivors to participate with others, in social and public scenarios,
The transformative nature of movement through embodied encounters                            through the process of recovery; supporting the body in performing
extends needs beyond the ability of being able to raise an arm, of                           voluntary movements whilst maintaining a familiar aesthetic. This brings

324                                                                                                                                                                                 325
      Figure 15.                                                                                      Figure
      Deformation                                                                                     18. The
      as a result of                                                                                  development
      movement:                                                                                       of move-
      Eurecat, Bar-                                                                                   ment: Part
      celona.                                                                                         1: Eurecat,
                                                                                                      Barcelona.

                                                                                                      Figure
                                                                                                      19. The
                                                                                                      development
                                                                                                      of move-
                                                                                                      ment: Part
                                                                                                      2: Eurecat,
                                                                                                      Barcelona.
                       into discussion the association of body and culture, where one is seen
      Figure 16.       to ‘fit in’. Does the visualisation of the body restrict social connections?
      Structural       Support worker ‘Person E’ recalls discussions with a stroke survivor
      changes:         about wearing ‘tracksuit trousers’ for an interview. Suit trousers were
      Eurecat, Bar-    particularly difficult to dress into and so restricted ability to both dress
      celona.          in and afterwards, function in, limiting the capacity for the individual
                       to attend the interview. Yet whilst tracksuit trousers enabled this, their
                       aesthetic can be deemed inappropriate to this setting, indicating a
                       lack of effort, care and even ability. There is often a desire where “the
                       personality is at one with itself and the world” (Darmon and Frade 2012,
                       204) yet there exists “plurality of roles and social spheres” (Ruggerone,
                       2017) and so the existence of ones self and ones identity changes
                       accordingly, meaning that where tracksuit trousers would be accepted
                       in a meeting of friends, they may not be at an interview. Garments in the
                       wrong context can generate feelings of embarrassment, awkwardness
                       and unease, translating into the communication and function of our
                       bodies. As clothing may be seen as a platform to serve people in the
                       processes of self-intervention required in various contexts (Finkelstein,
      Figure 17.       2007), it may be briefly understood that the visualisation of function can
      Integrating      feedback to impact function itself. Where this occurs generally in the
      movement:
      Eurecat,                                                                                        Figure 20.
      Barcelona.                                                                                      The devel-
      (Salisbury,                                                                                     opment of
      2018).                                                                                          movement:
                                                                                                      Part 3: Eure-
                                                                                                      cat, Barce-
                                                                                                      lona.




326                                                                                                             327
                                                                                 Figure 21.        for the integration of techniques into textiles is considered in the
                                                                                 Embroidering      manner of providing support to the upper limb in order to enhance
                                                                                 movement:         voluntary movement so that training or movement becomes easier to
                                                                                 RCA.
                                                                                                   access. This is done specifically by working to alleviate ‘high forces’
                                                                                                   present that restricts the ability to perform voluntary movements; the
                                                                                                   increased weight of the limb as a result of non-use. Contrary to earlier
                                                                                                   investigation ‘Navigating Movement’, this final study doesn’t seek to
                                                                                                   suggest particular movements, but rather aims to facilitate the ease of
                                                                                                   being able to perform voluntary movements by removing a barrier that
                                                                                                   is seen to reduce the ability in doing so.
culture of clothes, this may be exaggerated when an added function is
attributed to the garment that is associated with disability.                                      Studies conducted by Krakauer et al. (2018) display the effectiveness of
                                                                                                   alleviating the ‘high forces’; in this case SMARTS II uses haptic robots
Either by integrating it into the pattern of the weave (Figure 17) or                              to do so. We may begin to question how the integration of this method
by using embroidery techniques (Figure 21) the functionality became                                into textiles might enable this to be carried with the body. Therefore,
integrated and intertwined with the visibility of the resulting functionality.                     the textile allows for the expression of the body’s own behaviour to
It is important to know that the density of the weave would impact the                             facilitate movement alongside daily life. Training therefore occurs within
aesthetic and application to regularly used clothing -requiring a more                             ADLs.
tightly packed pattern to discourage it from being easily pulled. But
for the purposes of this research, this was loosened to enable easier                              Fitzpatrick (2011) in Moller and Kettley (2017) acknowledges a shift
identification of behavioural attributes and demonstrate the function                              of care from clinical settings into “patients’ hands and homes”. This
more visible to the naked eye (Figure 16). The sample shown in figure 20                           expanding space for design is altering the patient: clinician relationship
has the potential to be both its own textile, with continued development                           and the transition of the context within which care is situated in,
of colour, insulation (see Figure 22 and 23) and changing the feel of the                          especially for complex, ongoing cases like rehabilitation. Roles
conductive yarns , or used as a layer between textiles, and so is not                              and responsibilities are becoming questioned, including within this
‘directly’ felt or seen. Whilst the use of embroidery techniques mean                              research where the behaviour of the individual, in both conscious and
that the qualities of the textile in Figure 20 could be translated directly                        subconscious states influence and become influenced by the garment
onto the surface of a more ‘familiar’, pre-existing textile.                                       on a greater internal level. The body becomes extended beyond its
                                                                                 Figure 22.
                                                                                                   form but also in a way where its own form is passed through a ‘non
                                                                                 Insulating to     human’ material form within such a close proximity to the body. The
                                                                                 reduce heat       use of the changing shape of the textile is therefore seen to support the
                                                                                 transfer to the   limb, by shortening and thus pulling across the top of the shoulder, and
                                                                                 body: Eurecat,    lengthening beneath, acting as an artificial muscle via electrothermal
                                                                                 Barcelona.        methods. Within the film (Figure 24), a hairdryer is used as a visual
                                                                                                   symbol documenting the presence of heat on the textile.

                                                                                                   It should be suggested that the use of heat stimulus requires care
                                                                                                   to be taken when applying this next to the body, but also isolated
                                                                                                   from other heat stimuli in the surrounding contexts to the body, thus
                                                                                                   limiting the effects to the stimulus within the textile. Interference would
                                                                                 Figure 23.
Haptic support                                                                   Comparative       undoubtedly disrupt the process of ‘care’. As such, an insulator was
‘The figuration of motion is anticipated by the perception and ability           study showing     tested (Figure 22 and 23) and embedded within the garment to induce
to perceive and portray motion’ (Zinsmeister, 2016). If one considers            the effects of    haptic support. Not only would this restrict the intrusion of external
themselves to be unable to perform a movement, then this can, without            exposed con-      stimuli, but contain the internal stimulus within the textile, thus not
conscious motivation for pursuit, prevent the motion from happening.             ductive yarn      passing on the effects of increased heat to the body which may result in
                                                                                 and the heat      discomfort. Figure 22 displays the successful application of an insulator
Voluntary movements that enable routine activities of daily living (ADLs)
                                                                                 emitted from      around the internal yarn formation. In direct comparison where this
can become restrictive in the quality of everyday life. Enabling voluntary       the source:
movements to occur more easily, but not doing the movement for                                     isn’t controlled, Figure 23 shows the presence of heat emitting from
                                                                                 Eurecat, Bar-
someone, may facilitate the process of recovery. Further consideration           celona.           the source to the surrounding environment. Where temperatures range
                                                                                                   from 41℃ to just over 100℃ in the uncontrolled sample (Figure 23),
328                                                                                                                                                                              329
                                                                              Figure 24. Al-   including ‘Participant A’ suggesting that identity and social inclusion
                                                                              leviating high   is of greater importance than was anticipated. And so to finish, raw
                                                                              forces through   conversation is detailed below, documenting a sample of the feedback
                                                                              intelligent
                                                                                               gained from the early lines of enquiry showing discussions held with
                                                                              textiles: A
                                                                              concept film,    ‘Participant A’:
                                                                              RCA.
                                                                                                  Support Worker:
                                                                                                  ‘Would you wear this?’

                                                                                                  Participant A:
                                                                                                  ‘My shoulder [is injured]. I have a sling. I bought it online. You
                                                                                                  can either slide it on or open it with the velcro, but the velcro is
                                                                                                  a pain in the neck. So I’ve [prepared the velcro and] got it how
                                                                                                  I want it. Then I put it on and pull it so it brings this shoulder
                                                                                                  [upwards]’

                                                                                                  ‘Acupuncture helps but I wear this to bring it in. And I wear it but
                                                                                                  I don’t like wearing it here [support group] because people go
                                                                                                  “ooh what’s that you got” and I’m like ugh [do I have to answer
                                                                                                  those questions].’

                                                                                                  ‘I have a double one [sling which holds both shoulders] because
                                                                                                  it helps to bring it in [which I wear] under the clothes, but the
                                                                                                  other one [single sling] I wear over the clothes’

                                                                                               Used to help participate in other lesson. Used to be able to access other
                                                                                               activities.

                                                                                                  Support Worker:
                                                                                                  ‘So if you could put on a t-shirt (made of this textile) that did that
temperatures remained at environmental temperature between 29℃                                    function of pulling the arm up…’
to 32℃ in the insulated sample (Figure 22).
                                                                                                  Participant A:
Conclusions                                                                                       ‘...yeah I actually wear that [the sling] to do that but it’s not great
The pursuit of this work is to change the quality of life of those affected                       but it does it’s job.’
by stroke, in particular those who have suffered a stroke and struggle
with the pressures to pursue recovery. Where this paper presents an on-                           Support Worker:
going body of work, and details accounts of the very first experiments,                           “What if that could look ‘normal’ or ‘fashionable’?”
feedback from each stage of the research has been pursued. What
became apparent was the need to avoid thinking that a garment would                               Participant A:
only appeal to a particular demographic. One of the most surprising                               “That’s tears what you’re saying right now. It’s like I really want
parts of the study was in the interest of wider ranges of demographics                            to cry”

                                                                                                  Support Worker:
                                                                                                  “So it’s that important to you?”

                                                                                                  Participant A:
                                                                                                  “Yeah because inside I’m hurt, I’m hurt inside places that nobody
                                                                                                  knows. I don’t want to show it. It’s not that I’m frightened of it,

330                                                                                                                                                                         331
      it’s just that constant “ooh” [sympathy]. I’ve had four years of it, I             Brochu, P. Pei, Q. (2010) Advances in dielectric elastomers for actuators and artificial
      don’t want it anymore. I’m in that thought that I’m not right and                  muscles. Macromol Rapid Commun 31 (1): 10-36.
      I don’t want to think about that’                                                  Buchanan, I. (1997) “The problem of the body in Deleuze and Guattari, or, what can a
                                                                                         body do?” Body & Society 3 (3): 73-91.
The support worker discusses the visual colour and questions whether                     Chouliara, N. Crosby, B. Fisher, R. Walker, M. (2017) Understanding the delivery of
                                                                                         hospital-based stroke rehabilitation; the REVIHR study. NHS.
it should be worn underneath clothing.
                                                                                         Conforto, A. Dos Anjos, S. Bernardo, W. Silva, A. Conti, J. Machado, A. Cohen, L. (2018)
                                                                                         Repetitive peripheral sensory stimulation and upper limb performance in stroke: A
      Participant A:                                                                     systematic review and meta-analysis. Neurorehabilitation and Neural Repair, 32 (10):
      “I don’t think you should disguise it. With what it does and the                   863-871
      pattern. Would I wear it? Hell yeah!”                                              Damasio, A. (2000) The feeling of what happens. London: Vintage.
                                                                                         Darmon, I. Frade, C. (2012) “Beneath and beyond the fragments: The charms of
      Support Worker::                                                                   Simmel’s philosophical path for contemporary subjectivities.” Theory, Culture & Society
      “The blue almost radiates, glows”                                                  29 (7-8): 197-217.
                                                                                         De Wit, L. Putman, K. Lincoln, N. Baert, I. Berman, P. Beyens, H. Bogaerts, K. Brinkmann,
      Participant A:                                                                     N. Connel, L. Dajeager, E. De Weerdt, W. Jenni, W. Lesaffre, E. Leys, M. Louckx, F.
      “And the black sets it”                                                            Schuback, B. Schupp, W. Smith, B. Feys, H. (2006) Stroke rehabilitation in Europe.
                                                                                         Stroke. 37 (6): 1483-1489.
                                                                                         Doidge, N. (2016) The brain’s way of healing. London: Penguin
                                                                                         Entwistle, J. (2000). Fashion and the Fleshy Body: Dress as Embodied Practice. Fashion
                                                                                         Theory, 4. 3, 323-348.
References
                                                                                         Finkelstein, J. (2007) The art of self invention: Image and identity in popular visual
Baughman, R.H. (1996) Conducting polymer artificial muscles. Synth Met 78 (3): 339-      culture. London: Tauris.
353.                                                                                     Fitzpatrick, G. (2011) New challenges for health IT - Design fit for life. In Yoxall, A. (Ed.),
Belforte, G. Quaglia, G. Testore, F. Eula, G. Appendino, S. Wearable textiles for        Proceedings of the 1st European Conference on Design 4 Health (2011). 121-135.
rehabilitation of disabled patients using pneumatic systems in Langenhove (2007).        Sheffield, UK: Sheffield Hallam University. Retrieved from: http//research.shu.ac.uk/
Smart Textiles for medicine and healthcare: Materials, systems and applications. The     design4health/wp-content/uploads/2012/09/D4H2011_proceedings_v5a.pdf
Textile Institute. Woodhead Publishing.                                                  Fitzpatrick, G. (2011) in Moller, T. and Kettley, S. (2017) Wearable health technology
Biernaskie, J. Chernenko, G. Corbett, D. (2004) Efficacy of rehabilitative experience    design: A humanist accessory approach. International Journal of Design 11 (3): 35-49.
declines with time after focal ischemic brain injury. Journal of Neuroscience. 24 (5):   Frayling, C. (2015) Design-led research. [video] Available at: https://vimeo.
1245-1254.                                                                               com/129780632
                                                                                         Haines, C.S. et al. (2014) Artificial muscles from fishing line and sewing thread. Science
                                                                                         343 (6173): 868-872
                                                                                         Haines, C.S. Lia, N. Spinks, G.M. Aliev, A.E. Di, J. and Baughman, R. (2016) A new twist
                                                                                         on artificial muscles. PNAS. 113 (42): 11709-11716.
                                                                                         Ingold, T. (2013) Thinking through making. [video] Available at: https://www.youtube.
                                                                                         com/watch?v=Ygne72-4zyo
                                                                                         Johansen-Berg, H. (2019) Imaging and stimulating adaptive brain plasticity. Imperial
                                                                                         College Centre for Neurotechnology: London.
                                                                                         Kings, J. (2017) Models of Neurorehabilitation: who, why, what, when and how. UCL
                                                                                         Partners Centre for Neurorehabilitation: London.
                                                                                         Krakauer, J. (2018) Motor recovery after stroke: conceptual puzzle, practical challenge.
                                                                                         UCL Partners Centre for Neurorehabilitation: London.
                                                                                         Kwakkel, G. Veerbeek, J.M. Van Wegen, E.E.H Wolf, S.L. (2015) Constraint-induced
                                                                                         movement therapy after stroke. Lancet Neurol. 14 (2): 224-234
                                                                                         Langenhove, L. V. Hertleer, C. Westbroek, P. Priniotakis, J. (2007). Textile sensors for
                                                                                         healthcare. in Langenhove (2007). Smart Textiles for medicine and healthcare: Materials,
                                                                                         systems and applications. The Textile Institute. Woodhead Publishing.
                                                                                         Murata, Y. Higo, N. Oishi, T. Yamashita, A. Matsuda, K. Hayashi, M. Yamane, S. (2008)
                                                                                         Effects of motor training on the recovery of manual dexterity and primary motor cortex
                                                                                         lesion in macaque monkeys. Journal of Neurophysiology. 99 (2): 773-786.


332                                                                                                                                                                                        333
O’Learey, T. (2019) Degenerate feedback control in the nervous system. Imperial
College Centre for Neurotechnology: London.
Parker, V.M. Wade, D.T. Langton Hewer, R. (1986) Loss of arm function after stroke:
Measurement, frequency and recovery. International Rehabilitation Medicine. (8): 69-73.
Patient Quote. (2018) Upper Limb Programme Observation: 25/01/2018. Queen
Square: London.
Pelrine, R. Kornbluh, R. Pei, Q. Joseph, J. (2000) High-speed electrically actuated
elastomers with strain greater than 100%. Science 287 (5454): 836-839
Pullin, G. (2019) Hands of X. The Helen Hamlyn Centre for Design: London
Royal College of Physicians. (2016) National clinical guidelines for stroke. [online]
London: Royal College of Physicians Stroke Programme. Available at: https://www.
rcplondon.ac.uk/guidelines-policy/stroke-guidelines.
Ruggerone, L. (2017) The feeling of being dressed: Affect studies and the clothed body.
Fashion Theory: The journal of dress, body & culture. 21 (5): 573-593.
Sampson, E. (2018) The cleaved garment: the maker, the wearer and the “me and not
me” of fashion practice. Fashion Theory. 22. 3, 341-360.
Shahinpoor, M. Cohen, Y.B. Simpson, J.O. Smith, J. (1998) Ionic polymer-metal
composites (IMPCs) as biomimetic sensors, actuators and artificial muscles: A review.
Smart Mater Struct 7 (6): R15-R30.
Shahinpoor, M. Kim, K.J. (2001) Ionic polymer-metal composites: I. Fundamentals.
Smart Mater Struct 10 (1): 819-833.
Wade, D. (2017) Models of Neurorehabilitation: who, why, what, when and how. UCL
Partners Centre for Neurorehabilitation: London.
Ward, N. (2018) Upper Limb Programme Observation: 25/01/2018. Queen Square:
London.
Winnicott, D.W. (1953) “Transitional artefacts and transitional phenomena - A study of
the first not-me possession.” International Journal of Psycho-Analysis. 34: 89-97.
Winnicott, D.W. (1971) “Transitional objects and transitional phenomena.” In Playing
and Reality. London: Routledge.
Winnicott, D.W. (1989) “The use of an object and relating.” In Psychoanalytic
Explorations, edited by Winnicott, C. Shepherd, R and Davis, M. 89-90. London: Karnac.
Zeiler, S.R. Hubbard, R. Gibson, E.M. Zheng, T. Ng, K. O’Brien, R. Krakauer, J.W.
(2016) Paradoxical motor recovery from a first stroke after induction of a second stroke
reopening a postischemic sensitive period. Neurorehabilitation and Neural Repair, 30
(8): 794-800.
Zhang, X. Tao, X. (2001). Smart textiles: Passive smart. June 2001. 45-49, Smart textiles:
Active smart. July 2001. 49-52, Smart textiles: Very smart. August 2001. 35-37, Textile
Asia.




334                                                                                          335
         The Fair Energy
      Mark in the making:
       Framing a citizen-
            led campaign
         by participatory
                   design
                  Laura Santamaria
336                             337
Abstract                                                                    Beyond project making, as researchers working within a broad-based
There is a growing understanding that design can positively contribute      civil society organisation, we identified the opportunity to consider on
towards highly complex social, economic and environmental problems          how power is managed in expert and diffuse design in participatory
we face today. One key area is citizen empowerment to change built-in       processes, and elaborate conceptual constructs that help us reflect and
systemic inequalities and exploitative practices. This paper presents a     improve strategic design practice in the contexts of design for social
design intervention that explored citizen empowerment in the context        change.
of The Fair Energy Mark campaign, a citizen-led action aimed to
raise practice standards and address power imbalances in the energy         Research background
supply sector. The project-based investigation explored the tensions        In 2017, Citizens UK set a challenge for postgraduate students at
emerging between expert–diffuse design in the process of elaboration        Loughborough University London to develop innovations to address
of campaign branding and communication strategy. The researchers            fuel poverty, environmental and economic injustices in the energy
experimented with new tools that enabled an open participatory              market. Working within a Design Thinking process, students generated
process of campaign framing, but also facilitated fluid knowledge           a set of ‘Fair Energy Standards’ which served as the basis to develop
exchange between participants through experiential learning. The            the Fair Energy Mark. During the following 12 months, a steering
investigation contributes some conceptual constructs to discuss             committee of founding partners was formed with various stakeholders
strategic design management practice in the socio-political sphere.         who met monthly to further develop the kitemark, engaging the with
Furthermore, the research identified that a closer integration of design    local authorities and energy experts. In 2019, consensus was reached
and communicative action theories, and participatory design and             about the contents of the mark. At this point, the researchers, as
community organising methodologies present promising opportunities          design experts, were asked to lead the development of the campaign
to amplify the impact of design research for social change.                 branding and communications’ strategy. The task was to shape the
Keywords: design for social change; citizen empowerment; expert &           contents of the mark and develop strategies for its deployment and
diffuse design; strategic communications                                    implementation. This presented an opportunity for design research for
                                                                            change intervention.
Introduction
In times of energy resource scarcity and ecological extinction,
accessibility to affordable energy becomes an increased concern for                                                                                         Figure 1. Fair
citizens globally. While environmental and climate justice movements                                                                                        Energy Mark
organize and mobilize for radical changes by pressuring industries and                                                                                      development
political leaders, the conceptual tools and frameworks of energy justice                                                                                    timeline
and fuel poverty generated by academic scholarship seems slow to
attend to. Meanwhile, of the 14 million people living in poverty in the
UK, 8.5 million are food insecure and 2.5 million live in fuel poverty
(Barnard et al., 2018). Despite the perception of the UK leading the fuel
poverty agenda, politicians would have the public believe that reforming
the energy market is outside the realms of possibility (Middlemiss,
2017). This disempowering situation reveals not only the importance of
supporting initiatives to reduce poverty, but the potential for design to
amplify impact by creating innovative vehicles to even power dynamics
engrained in the energy sector through leveraging various interests.
                                                                            The Fair Energy Mark campaign: Making fuel poverty a design
With design research taking responsibilities and standing up for energy
futures (Fuller & McCauley, 2016; Jenkins, Sovacool, & McCauley,
                                                                            for change issue
                                                                            Campaigns are an undeniably effective vehicle for paradigm change.
2018), we stress the importance of engaging at all levels – i.e. not only
                                                                            Conceptualised as a form of activism grounded in communicative action
via sociotechnical innovation and policy groups, but more importantly
                                                                            theory (Habermas, 1984), they aim to disseminate knowledge and ways
with civil society organisations, activist networks and citizen-advocacy
                                                                            of understanding that empower people to take individual actions that,
groups (Delina & Janetos, 2018; Jenkins et al., 2018; Shove, 2018) who
                                                                            collectively, generate benefit for society as a whole. Historically, Citizens
work tirelessly towards addressing injustices and empower the most
                                                                            UK has initiated very successful nationwide campaigns such as the
vulnerable and underrepresented peoples and issues.
                                                                            Living Wage which resulted in pay rises for over 150,000 workers and
                                                                            their families. Equally, the FEM campaign represents an opportunity for
338                                                                                                                                                                   339
design research for change whereby the framing – or reframing – of            refers to ongoing designing in which the designed projects/products
complex issues around energy becomes key to influence practices in            are designed in such a way so that they can be redesigned, and serve
the energy market at individual, local and national level.                    to build capacity and learning that positively impacts the agency of
                                                                              the stakeholders involved – i.e. ‘knowledge is power’. Conceptualising
The concept of framing is an important topic at the centre of power and       PD as empowerment (Ehn, 2008) has located PD within the wider
influence (Goffman, 1986) because it focuses attention on certain events      community as it approached societal issues as ongoing infrastructures
and then places them within a field of meaning and relevance . Framing        (Björgvinsson, Ehn, & Hillgren, 2010; P. A. Hillgren, Seravalli, & Emilson,
theory suggests that how something is presented to the audience (called       2011; Le Dantec & DiSalvo, 2013).
‘the frame’) influences the choices people make about how to process
that information, and therefore creates biases that influence beliefs and     This means that beyond delivering specific project outcomes, expert
behaviour (Kahneman & Tversky, 1984). Frames are essentially ‘schema          designers seeking infrastructuring interventions aim to grow the design
of interpretation’ of values negotiated politically between actors over       and change capabilities within individuals, organisations, communities
unfolding issues (Goffman, 1986). Typically, values that are legitimised      or multiple stakeholders. This is translated in forms of training initiatives
through framing strategies are manifestly bound up with the cultures          such as participatory and co-creation workshops, and/or collaborative
and agenda-setting practices of elite actors (Scheufele, 2000).               pilot projects. Formalising design processes and methodologies to be
                                                                              transferable is part of this strategy (Sangiorgi, 2015).
In design, framing is understood as a meaning- and sense-making
process, intrinsic and inseparable to the design activity (Dorst, 2015).      Strategic action: Citizens UK and community organising
As design represents and legitimises meanings and values (Kolko,              The work done by Citizen’s UK has been conceptualised as a ‘broad-
2011; Krippendorff, 2006) – influencing tastes, beliefs, prejudices that      based community organising’ in the UK, a political methodology
can change people’s views and behaviours – design is political by             ontologically rooted in civil society and epistemologically based on the
definition. However, unlike in media or strategic action where framing        concept of power’ (Bunyan, 2018).
is used explicitly to influence and advance agendas, design influence
is implicitly bound up within expertise and there is a lack of knowledge         “For Citizens UK the word power is really central to our fuel
on how political and ideological dimensions are managed in the social            of change. Some people feel very uneasy with that, but we
sphere, due to limited integration of theories of social change within           recognise that power is essential if you want to make real change.
design research (Willis, 2012). ‘Design is always a silent but hard-working      And we unpack power by talking about organised people and
part of our history. Design is one of the most powerful routes through           organised money.” – Community organiser (Citizens UK)
which our beliefs and views of the world flow’ (Zingale & Domingues,
2015, p.9). In this, learning from others can advance a more legitimate       The strategic vision for change employed by Citizens UK is based on a
and transparent practice.                                                     view of society that is “comprised of three distinct sectors: 1) the state,
                                                                              the governments and the regulatory boards, 2) the market, companies,
Strategic design in the social sphere                                         corporations, and 3) civil society” (Citizens UK). From a community
In order to obtain the change they seek, citizen movements and                organising perspective, this means that civil society holds the state and
organisations can often be driven by strategic action agendas – i.e.          the market accountable of the practices and values they represent. At
action oriented toward success, pursued regardless of the interests           the core of their methodology lies creating permanent alliances between
of others (Jacobson, 2003). In contrast, strategic design seeks to use        different civil society group to address worthwhile and winnable issues.
‘design principles and practices to guide strategy development and            While such issues might not achieve radical change in the community,
implementation toward innovative outcomes that benefit people and             the ultimate goal for Citizens UK is capacity building for participation in
organisations alike’ (Calabretta, Gemser, & Karpen, 2016).                    public life. This is done through relational meeting/one-to-one sessions
                                                                              and listening campaigns that seek to identify and train citizens to be
Common across strategic design practice for social change are co-             leaders who mobilise their communities to take action on issues they
production and collaborative principles, where a wide network of              care about.
stakeholders are considered as co-creators of public value. Co-creation
is strongly connected to notions of “participatory design”, “co-design”,      Citizens UK logic of non-partisan organising strategy with capacity
“design attitude” and “design thinking” (Bason, 2010, p.7). Within            building for leadership as an objective sets Citizens UK apart from the
Participatory Design (PD) design operates as a participatory process for      sporadic nature of social movements, and is parallel to strategic design
“design-for-use” and “design-for-future-use” that is “infrastructuring”       principles of empowerment through infrastructuring and building
(Le Dantec & DiSalvo, 2013). Infrastructuring, as developed within PD,

340                                                                                                                                                           341
powerful alliances that create value for all (Hillgren, Seravalli, & Eriksen,                                          design expertise in communication strategy is a valuable resource that
2016). Table 1 summarises the similarities in both approaches.                                                         equips us to deploy, professionally, the mechanisms that work best to
                                                                                                                       influence public perception and action towards the desired change.
                       Community Organising                   Strategic Social Design                  Table 1.        This gives rise to our research question(s):
 Empowerment           Capacity building through relational   Infrastructuring through participatory   Comparison
 through knowledge     sessions, listening                    projects                                 of principles
                                                                                                                       How is power negotiated in the diffuse–expert design relationship?
                       Training for leadership                Formalising methodologies                adopted by
 Organising strategy   Non-partisan civil society alliances   Stakeholder partnerships
                                                                                                       Community
                                                                                                       Organising          • How does the ‘empowering of others’ (diffuse design) and
 Agenda/goal           Citizen participation                  Co-production of ‘expert-diffuse’                              ‘self-power’ (expert design) relation balance?
                                                                                                       and Strategic
                                                              outcomes
                                                                                                       Design for          • How can we open participation in the framing and strategy
 Vision of change      Rebalancing power (pressure)           Innovation (value creation)              social change         elaboration process?
                                                                                                                           • How can the expert designer enable and empower?

These synergies present a resourceful and genuine territory for                                                        We see these questions contributing to literature on community-based
developing joint methodologies that can potentiate empowerment in                                                      PD and within that to the discussion on PD for useful systems and PD as
citizen-driven societal change.                                                                                        infrastructuring (Ehn, 2008; Le Dantec & DiSalvo, 2013).

While it is clear that PD practices have enhanced the democratisation                                                  The study
of the design process, what is less clear is how the power conferred                                                   The aim of the project was to co-design the materiality of the campaign
to the designer as ‘expert’ is managed in these settings, and how                                                      that could speak to and mobilise wider public(s). This involved
we – as design research scholars and practitioners – should attend to                                                  facilitating participation in framing process for drawing together 1) the
the tensions emerging in the production of expert-diffuse designs as                                                   communications and marketing expertise of energy companies with 2)
vehicles for change.                                                                                                   the leadership and human resource mobilising for collective actions
                                                                                                                       capacity from Citizens UK, and 3) lived experience and knowledge
The concept of ‘expert design’ refers to the discipline and profession                                                 practices from local citizens.
that emerged at the beginning of the last century (Manzini, 2015).
In these settings, however, this means someone who is expert in the                                                    Our methodology for the study sought to develop a format that would
various ways of stimulating and supporting wider, more complex co-                                                     be familiar enough for diverse stakeholders to co-articulate the FEM
designing processes for the non-experts (Manzini, 2015). The design                                                    campaign. This included experts and non-experts in design and strategy
expert is expected to integrate and promote the design abilities of                                                    who, although diverse in their practice, share a vision of change for the
the others; ‘diffuse designing’ of everybody – i.e. design as a diffuse                                                energy market.
human capability. This view implies that the expertise of the designer
transcends the traditional technical capability (for example, to design                                                Workshop design
a campaign logo) and extends into the capacity to enable community                                                     We designed the workshop around the metaphor of the local newspaper,
empowerment to design their own vehicles for change, to articulate                                                     as a relatable and familiar framework . The activities were inspired
and frame their significance and meaning, and to implement them in a                                                   by drawing framing techniques from leadership and organisational
way that makes sense to them. Thus, design becomes a collaborative
effort where ‘the design process is spread among diverse participating
                                                                                                                        Activity               Technique           Purpose                                                               Table 2.
stakeholders and competences’ (Björgvinsson, Ehn, & Hillgren, 2012)                                                                            (Fairhurst, 1996)
– i.e. the expert and the community – and is envisioned and explored                                                    WORKSHOP               Metaphor            To frame a conceptual idea through comparison to something
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Framing
                                                                                                                                                                   else                                                                  workshop
in hands-on ways characterized by human-centeredness, empathy and
                                                                                                                        Activity 1             Stories             To frame a topic via narrative in a vivid and memorable way           activities
optimism.                                                                                                               Stories and personas

Habermas holds that ‘the negotiation of definitions of the situation is
                                                                                                                        Activity 2             Artefacts           Objects with intrinsic symbolic value – a visual/cultural item that
an essential element of the interpretive accomplishment required by                                                     Brand values                               holds more meaning than the object itself
communicative action’ (Habermas 1984, p. 286). Thus, the ‘definition                                                    & Visualisation
                                                                                                                                               Slogan              To frame an object with a catchy phrase to make it more
of the situation’ can be usefully conceptualised as a framing activity                                                                                             memorable and relatable

that can be facilitated through participatory methods. For this reason,                                                 Activity 3             Spin                To present a concept in such a way as to convey a value
                                                                                                                        Communication Strategy                     judgement (positive or negative) that might not be immediately
as expert designers, we see our role as ‘staging the process’ wherein                                                                                              apparent; to create an inherent bias by definition.
                                                                                                                        Activity 5 Headlines
elaboration of strategy can happen democratically. On the other hand,
342                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   343
communication literature (Fairhurst & Sarr, 1996) which best suited the                         developing the communication strategy by thinking about calls to action
context and the purpose (Table 2).                                                              that a) would invite new energy companies to join the mark, b) raise
                                                                                                awareness among energy advocacy groups mediating between citizens
The venue                                                                                       and energy companies, and b) mobilise the wider public to switch to
Our campaign partner, St James the Great Clapton (London) provided                              energy providers that represent the values of the mark. Together we
the venue, as this was considered a welcoming and inclusive community                           then mapped campaign tactics to spread the word on various platforms
space (Figure 2). Invitations were circulated strategically to reach energy                     (Activity 4). The last activity aimed to frame the narrative of the cause
companies, citizens advocacy groups and community centres, but the                              and the campaign by coming up with headlines that would speak to the
setup remained open for anyone interested to drop in and join.                                  press and the public (Activity 5). In the following sections we provide an
                                                                                                overview of the these in more detail.
                                                                                Figure 2. FEM
                                                                                Participatory
                                                                                framing work-   Activity 1 – Stories and personas
                                                                                shop            This activity was designed to enable narratives to emerge from the
                                                                                                experiences and tacit knowledge of the participants.

                                                                                                Through writing and representations, participants expressed the lack
                                                                                                of reciprocity in the supplier-customer relationship (Figure 3). The
                                                                                                recurrent themes in the data were fuel poverty, lack of support, debt
                                                                                                lock, unfairness, lack of accountability and transparency and poor
                                                                                                service.

                                                                                                There is a call to action for the industry to step up in its responsibility
                                                                                                towards customers, developing more ethical business practices, and
The process                                                                                     for the powerholders to “play your part in reducing people living in
Communication strategists and graphic designers from Bulb and                                   poverty.” This could be particularly important when the campaign has
Octopus Energy, community leaders from Foodbank, Citizens Advice,                               the intention of disrupting the status quo.
Citizens UK, and the local church and citizens with lived experience of
fuel poverty participated actively in the workshop. Guided through the                          Strategically, this also poses an opportunity for companies to gain
five activities, participants articulated the brand – that is issues, values,                   competitive advantage by improving customers service to strengthen
vision, language of FEM – and put forward strategic actions to mobilise                         relationships with customers. Service innovations that allow for customer
publics.                                                                                        empowerment and could be viewed as opportunity to improve supplier
                                                                                                credibility and retain customers.
Activity 1 focused on deconstructing the stories of lived experience of
fuel poverty. We then moved on to visualise and construct the brand
by thinking about the benefits, values and the promise of FEM (Activity                                                                                                       Figure 4. Ac-
2) and synthesising a visual language in a poster. Activity 3 focused on                                                                                                      tivity 2: Brand
                                                                                                                                                                              articulation
                                                                                                                                                                              and rep-
                                                                                Figure 3.
                                                                                                                                                                              resentations
                                                                                Activity 1:
                                                                                                                                                                              generated by
                                                                                participant’s
                                                                                                                                                                              participants
                                                                                representa-
                                                                                tions of un-
                                                                                balanced and
                                                                                unjust power
                                                                                relationships




344                                                                                                                                                                                      345
Activity 2 – Visualisation and brand representation                                                                                                                       Figure 6.
The language that dominated the workshop was ‘fair’ and ‘care’ – there                                                                                                    Activity 4:
can be no doubt that the participants intend these value messages are                                                                                                     co-created
                                                                                                                                                                          strategies for
to be communicated loud and clear through the promise and benefits
                                                                                                                                                                          campaign
of the fair energy mark. Figure 4 summarises the activity findings.                                                                                                       implementa-
                                                                                                                                                                          tion
Activity 3 – Communication strategy
Figure 5 evidences ideas generated for communication strategy
directed to the various stakeholders – energy suppliers, strategic
partners and the general public.

The call to action further articulated the brand benefits to various
stakeholders. The results provide a social learning opportunity for
industry to understand that citizens are demanding change and if
industry does not respond, they will miss out. The empowerment of the
participants can be evidenced by the changing language when given                            Activity 5 – Headlines
opportunity to role model.                                                                   The last activity was aimed to encapsulate the cause by coming up with
                                                                                             newspaper headlines that would communicate persuasively to the press
                                                                            Figure 5.        and the public. The activity provided an opportunity for participants to
                                                                            Activity 3:      take an outsider point of view, and decide on ‘how others should see
                                                                            elaboration of   us.’
                                                                            communica-
                                                                            tion strategy                                                                                 Figure 7.
                                                                                                                                                                          Activity 5:
                                                                                                                                                                          newspaper
                                                                                                                                                                          headlines
                                                                                                                                                                          produced by
                                                                                                                                                                          participants




It is also worth noting the implication in the language that there are
credibility issues with some industry players (“enhance your reputation”)
and the power is shifting to the citizen calling for more consensual
relationships through the campaign language “be part of the change”.                         The statements take a hopeful tone, announcing a ‘change of dynamics’
                                                                                             to bring relief at last from unjust market practices.
Activity 4 – Campaign tactics
In response to the energy literature (Willis, 2019; Middlemiss, 2017)                        Discussion and reflections
which highlights the need to understand how we engage with energy                            While there is much literature on participatory design and co-design
systems in order to solve the problems we face, participants generated                       applied to the development of tools to facilitate citizen-led innovation
‘campaign tactics’ (Figure 6), and were prompted to identify the target                      on one hand, and the role of design in the development of branding to
audience of the campaign (who), and propose deployment ideas (how).                          support campaigns on the other, what this investigation set to interrogate
                                                                                             and challenge is the implicit nature in which expert design assumes and
Contrary to energy saving campaigns, the tactics that emerged here                           manages power in such collaborative practice arrangements.
point to the need for energy literacy – e.g. “pop-up open day and
discussions with energy experts who can help find the best deals.”


346                                                                                                                                                                                 347
Through project-making, the study provided a twofold opportunity for            Figure 8.
design research for change:                                                     Interpreting
                                                                                outcomes of
                                                                                the workshop
1. To observe the political and power dynamics of expert–diffuse
                                                                                for brand de-
engagement in the context of civil-society activism, and identify               velopment
constructs that can help bring to light the implicit understandings
of engagement; and 2. To facilitate expertise exchange between
two strategic approaches to social change (design and community
organising) and formalise the generated knowledge into methodologies
that amplify capacity building for agency towards change.

Conceptual constructs to discuss power in expert–diffuse design
Three broad concepts stand out from the literature as relevant to
discuss the expert–diffuse design relationship: expectations (Manzini,
2015), accountability (Habermas, 1984) and agendas (Scheufele, 2000).
These concepts appear fundamental to the implicit ‘engagement
contract’ for establishing a working partnership between the expert
and the community based on openness and mutual trust. We put them
forward as helpful constructs for structuring discussions and locating
power relationships.

Expectations
In the first place the designer is empowered by the group, by being
recognised as the most expert member of the community to further the
cause at that particular stage: a good communication strategy requires          Figure 9.
skills in persuasion, which a communication designer can deliver.               Final brand
However, in a conventional branding and strategic communications                communica-
exercise, it would not be standard practice to consult with ‘non-               tion visuals
designers’ or open up the process to participation, but rather the
expert would take charge and ownership for project development as
‘expert in the field’.

From the expert design practice perspective, this involves risk and
making more courageous, experimental choices (Manzini, 2016) and
remaining flexible and open throughout a dynamic collective sense-
making process. Delivering on these expectations meant that:

      1. we had to design tools fit for the purpose, familiar and inclusive –
         e.g. newspaper format – to enable citizens to collectively
         elucidate, articulate and strategically frame issues (Figure 8);
      2. we interpret the data collected through the workshop into
         professional standard communication materials. This implied
         refining the design outcomes while keeping legitimacy towards
         the set of embodied knowledge we generated together (Figure 9).

Accountability
The trust placed on the expert’s ability to lead the community through
this process prompted us to consider issues of accountability and
reciprocity.

348                                                                                      349
Working as an embedded member of the community, it can only be                                                                    Participatory activities as platforms for learning
sensible for the designer to adopt and build on community organising                                                              Beyond the importance of co-creating framing and strategy with
methodologies, principles and best practice. In this case, it meant                                                               the people and businesses the project will impact (stakeholders and
sharing power through consultative decision making, and being                                                                     project outcomes), bringing participatory design and the community
accountable to the group for the kind of operative mechanisms we                                                                  organising logic of Citizens UK together in the workshop provided
created to enable inclusivity and participation. It also required setting                                                         mutually beneficial means for knowledge exchange that extends
aside a ‘problem solving–outcome oriented’ mindset and adopting                                                                   capacity building – or empowerment – for change in many ways. In
a ‘learning–infrastructuring’ mindset. For example, rather than a                                                                 Table 3 we illustrate how the project enlarged and enriched areas of
mechanism to ‘harvest data’, workshopping was considered a capacity                                                               practice and understanding through this collaborative partnership, with
building opportunity that provided an inclusive way of grasping new                                                               new learnings highlighted in bold.
understandings, bringing transformation and empowerment through
experiential learning and creative self-expression.                                                                               Conclusions
                                                                                                                                  In this project, we engaged with paradigm change through design
Agendas                                                                                                                           in civil society activism context. Through a project-based research
Drawing framing strategies is a highly political dimension to navigate                                                            aimed at participatory co-creation of campaign brand and strategic
as designers. Like with all stakeholders involved, it required exercising                                                         communications, we explored the political aspects at play in the
self-reflection frequently to identify the motivations behind our views,                                                          expert-diffuse design relationship and contribute a useful construct
decisions and actions, and disclosing them openly.                                                                                – expectations-accountability-agendas – to discuss the contractual
                                                                                                                                  engagement in practice-based interventions with citizen empowerment
Questions such as ‘What decisions am I taking on behalf of others?                                                                at its core.
Are we preselecting or progressing certain choices without consulting
others? Are we highlighting or prioritizing certain aspects over others?’                                                         By enabling expert knowledge transfer through issue framing activities,
prompted reflection for ourselves and others, and kept us on check to                                                             the research achieved transformative effects at individual level,
ensure that the power and responsibility entrusted to us as experts was                                                           empowering citizens as agents capable to create their own vehicles
exercised responsibly and we did not get ourselves in the way while                                                               for change. At collective level, the changed achieved through this
striving to achieve strategic goals legitimately.                                                                                 design research collaboration is evidenced in having moved the cause
                       Community Organising                    Strategic Social Design
                                                                                                                                  a step forward – that is, from the critique and issue debate space into
                                                                                                                  Table 3.
                                                                                                                                  materialising actionable pathways to make the issue visible, but most
 Empowerment           Capacity building through relational    Infrastructuring through participatory projects    Transforma-
 through knowledge     sessions, listening                                                                        tive change     importantly a persuasive and winnable cause.
                                                               Formalising methodologies
                       Training for leadership                                                                    through
                                                               Good practice in inclusive, relational strategic
                       Moving from the debate to               leadership for social change                       project-based   Although this paper presents the experimental stage of the project, it
                       materialisation                                                                            learning        is worth noting that considerable public funding for advancing the FEM
                       New methods for creating                                                                                   campaign as a larger, long-term project was subsequently secured, on
                       stakeholder ownership
                                                                                                                                  the basis of the strong alliances and robust results produced at this
                       Identifying areas of opportunity for
                       innovation                                                                                                 stage. At disciplinary level, the research identified important knowledge
 Organising strategy   Non-partisan civil society alliances    Stakeholder partnerships                                           gaps in strategic design management in the socio-political sphere. A
 Agenda/goal           Explicit. Motivated by citizen          Implicit. Motivated by co-production of
                                                                                                                                  closer integration of design and communicative action theories, and
                       participation                           ‘expert-diffuse’ outcomes                                          participatory design and community organising methodologies pose
                       Understanding that creating value for   Setting up mechanisms for motivation                               significantly promising avenues for accelerating the impact of design
                       all stakeholders advances the cause     disclosure, accountability and transparency in
                       via higher buy-in instead of            decision making that affects representation of
                                                                                                                                  research for social change.
                       pressuring.                             all
                                                               Reflect on tacit contractual terms of
                                                               engagement.
 Vision of change      Rebalancing power (pressure)            Innovation (value creation)
                                                               Participation and co-creation mechanism as
                                                               enablers for capacity building and mutual
                                                               empowerment.
                                                               A learning vs facilitation mindset
                                                               Detachment of subjectivity and choosing most
                                                               effective strategy for achieving legitimacy and
                                                               impact.


350                                                                                                                                                                                                           351
References                                                                                     Krippendorff, K. (2006). The semantic turn : a new foundation for design. CRC/Taylor
                                                                                               & Francis.
Barnard, H., Collingwood, A., Wenham, A., Smith, E., Drake, B., Leese, D., & Kumar, A.         Le Dantec, C. A., & DiSalvo, C. (2013). Infrastructuring and the formation of publics
(2018). UK Poverty 2018.                                                                       in participatory design. Social Studies of Science, 43(2), 241–264. https://doi.
                                                                                               org/10.1177/0306312712471581
Bason, C. (2010). Leading Public Sector Innovation: Co-creating for a Better Society.
                                                                                               Manzini, E. (2015). Design, When Everybody Designs: An Introduction to Design for
Björgvinsson, E., Ehn, P., & Hillgren, P.-A. (2010). Participatory design and                  Social Innovation. MIT Press.
“democratizing innovation.” In Proceedings of the 11th Biennial Participatory Design
Conference on - PDC ’10 (p. 41). New York, New York, USA: ACM Press. https://doi.              Middlemiss, L. (2017). A critical analysis of the new politics of fuel poverty in England.
org/10.1145/1900441.1900448                                                                    Critical Social Policy, 37(3), 425–443. https://doi.org/10.1177/0261018316674851
Björgvinsson, E., Ehn, P., & Hillgren, P.-A. (2012). Agonistic participatory design: working   Sangiorgi, D. (2015). Designing for public sector innovation in the UK: Design strategies
with marginalised social movements. CoDesign, 8(2–3), 127–144. https://doi.org/10.10           for paradigm shifts. Foresight, 17(4), 332–348. https://doi.org/10.1108/FS-08-2013-
80/15710882.2012.672577                                                                        0041
Bunyan, P. (2018). Broad-based community organising in the UK: Re-imagining politics           Scheufele, D. (2000). Agenda Setting, Priming and Framing Revisited. Mass
through the prism of civil society.                                                            Communication & Society, 5436(August 2014), 37–41. https://doi.org/10.1207/
                                                                                               S15327825MCS0323
Calabretta, G., Gemser, G., & Karpen, I. (2016). Strategic design : eight essential
practices every strategic designer must master. BIS Publishers.                                Shove, E. (2018). What is wrong with energy efficiency? Building Research and
                                                                                               Information, 46(7), 779–789. https://doi.org/10.1080/09613218.2017.1361746
Delina, L., & Janetos, A. (2018). Cosmopolitan, dynamic, and contested energy futures:
Navigating the pluralities and polarities in the energy systems of tomorrow. Energy            Willis, A. (2012). Design, change and politics. Design Philosophy Papers, 11882(3),
Research and Social Science, 35, 1–10. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.erss.2017.11.031              12–13.
Dorst, K. (2015). Frame Innovation: Create New Thinking By Designing. (K. Friedman &           Zingale, S., & Domingues, F. (2015). The consequences of things: The semiotics and the
E. Stolterman, Eds.). Cambridge Massachusetts, London England: MIT Press.                      pragmatistic route to designing. In EAD 11 The Value of Design Research. Paris: EAD
                                                                                               (European Association of Design).
Ehn, P. (2008). Participation in Design Things. In Proceedings of the tenth anniversary
conference on participatory design (pp. 92–101). Indiana University. https://doi.
org/10.7551/mitpress/8262.003.0011
Fairhurst, G. T., & Sarr, R. A. (1996). The art of framing : managing the language of
leadership. Jossey-Bass Publishers.                                                            Acknowledgements
                                                                                               I wish to thank Loughborough University London for financially
Fuller, S., & McCauley, D. (2016). Framing energy justice: Perspectives from activism
and advocacy. Energy Research and Social Science, 11, 1–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.          sponsoring this project through their JOINT Fund award; Dr Vicky
erss.2015.08.004                                                                               Lofthouse for her ongoing support and inspiring mentoring; Noémi
Goffman, E. (1986). Frame Analysis. An Essay on the Organization of Experience.                Zajzon and Britta Boyer, research assistants, who contributed many
Boston: Northeastern University Press.                                                         valuable skills towards this project, and devoted time to insightful
Habermas, J. (1984). The Theory of Communicative Action: Reason and the                        discussions that enriched the reflections presented in this paper.
Rationalization of Society. Contemporary Sociology. https://doi.org/10.2307/2071660
Hillgren, P.-A., Seravalli, A., & Eriksen, M. A. (2016). Counter-hegemonic practices;
dynamic interplay between agonism, commoning and strategic design. Strategic
Design Research Journal, 9(2), 89–99. https://doi.org/10.4013/sdrj.2016.92.04
Hillgren, P. A., Seravalli, A., & Emilson, A. (2011). Prototyping and infrastructuring in
design for social innovation. CoDesign, 7(3–4), 169–183. https://doi.org/10.1080/157
10882.2011.630474
Jacobson, T. L. (2003). Participatory Communication for Social Change: The Relevance
of the Theory of Communicative Action. Annals of the International Communication
Association, 27(1), 87–123. https://doi.org/10.1080/23808985.2003.11679023
Jenkins, K., Sovacool, B. K., & McCauley, D. (2018). Humanizing sociotechnical transitions
through energy justice: An ethical framework for global transformative change. Energy
Policy, 117, 66–74. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2018.02.036
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1984). Choices, values, and frames. American Psychologist,
39(4), 341. https://doi.org/10.1037/0003-066X.39.4.341
Koh, L., Marchand, R., Genovese, A., & Brennan, A. (2012). Fuel Poverty: Perspectives
from the Front Line.
Kolko, J. (2011). Exposing the magic of design : a practitioner’s guide to the methods
and theory of synthesis. New York NY [u.a.]: Oxford University Press.


352                                                                                                                                                                                         353
       Why knitting now?
           Textile design
      research as a driver
          for educational
                  change
             Jane Scott, Elizabeth Gaston and
                              Zoe Dennington
354                                        355
Abstract                                                                       The effect of textiles manufacturing can be significantly reduced by
Design education in the UK is under threat. Research conducted by the          decisions taken at the design stage (Charter and Tischner, 2001:120),
Crafts Council has identified a significant decline in both A Level and        therefore the role of the designer is critical to the future of textiles
GCSE art and design subject entries since 2010. For textile design this        (Fletcher, 2008, Black, 2013).
has led to falling student numbers and a reduction in skilled graduates.
This is significant. Textiles are ubiquitous; from the macro scale of the      As a textile process, knitting produces fabrics within unique levels
geotextiles that support national infrastructure, to the microscale of         of extensibility and formability; it is a production process that can
implantable medical devices, textiles encompasses a lot more than              enable the fabrication of two dimensional shaped panels or three-
clothing. This requires an understanding of not only the fundamental           dimensional forms (Spencer, 2001). Successful knit design requires
properties of textile materials, but also the production strategies to         knowledge of materials, process, technology and aesthetics. In
design and make in 2D and 3D.                                                  knitted fabric design unique combinations of this knowledge are
                                                                               literally built into the designed product and used to generate fabrics
This research presents a design intervention developed to respond              and forms with diverse, and highly specified functions. Knitting is
to this educational challenge. Working with the Crafts Council’s               a sustainable option for textile manufacturing because products
Make Your Future programme, and directly with schools in Yorkshire,            can be manufactured directly in 3D reducing material consumption
researchers at the University of Leeds developed and implemented a             through waste. In addition low impact, natural materials are
project designed to engage with the opportunities offered by a creative        important materials for knitting. For example smart textiles
curriculum. Using knitting as a tool for designing and making across a         research has developed systems to transform linen and wool into
variety of scales, the project worked with teachers, pupils and school         environmentally responsive material systems for architecture and
management to reposition textiles as a vehicle to respond to global            fashion (Scott, 2017).
challenges. Specific approaches applied biomimicry to the design of
complex forms and considered new applications of colour theory as a            Knit Design Research at the University of Leeds is a research
means to respond to the environmental problems of textile colouration.         led design studio directed by Jane Scott and Elizabeth Gaston
Outcomes of the project have been significant. The team worked                 that explores how textile design research methodologies and
directly with sixteen schools and delivered workshops in five schools          practices can be used to inform a range of theoretical, practical
within the Yorkshire region during 2018-2019. The paper reflects on            and pedagogical challenges. Knit Design Research examines
the impact of this intervention for pupils, teachers, school management        the potential to ask questions of this unique body of knowledge
and the wider community and considers how this experience can lead             to answer wider societal problems and to determine a range of
to lasting change in education. The ambition of this work is not only to       solutions through knitted fabric design practice. Using diverse
re-skill school pupils and teachers in specific textile making processes,      methodologies including biomimicry and Performance Craft
but also to renew the opportunities for design and craft education as          (Gaston, 2016) the group produces research outcomes that
a means to develop creative thinking and essential problem solving             challenge the conventional thinking of knitting as fashion. Instead,
abilities for all pupils.                                                      using experiential approaches, knitting is positioned as a way of
                                                                               thinking to develop materials for art, architecture and engineering.
Introduction
Textiles are pervasive. As a material system, textiles are highly complex;     In 2017 the research team were approached by the Crafts Council to
balancing strength and flexibility through the organisation of fibres,         act as a Yorkshire lead for the Make Your Future programme, and to
yarns and fabric structures. The applications for textiles extend into every   participate as maker-educators; focussed on introducing knitting as
aspect of life, from conventional applications in fashion, to engineering,     a tool for thinking and making into secondary schools in Yorkshire.
medicine and architecture (McQuaid, 2005). But there is a problem;             This research paper reports on the background to the Make Your
the quantity of textiles consumed globally, and the complexity of the          Future programme, and evaluates the programme of workshops
manufacturing system has a huge environmental impact, and change is            developed to engage pupils with Knit Design Research.
required to reduce the impact of the global textiles industry:
                                                                               Context
      “Textiles [is] fourth in the ranking of product categories which         In 2014, the Crafts Council launched Our Future is in the Making,
      cause the greatest impact, just after food and drinks, transport         the evidence-based education manifesto that sets out the case for
      and housing” (European Commission, 2013:1).                              every child having the chance to develop craft skills and achieve
                                                                               their full potential (Crafts Council, 2014). The manifesto highlighted
                                                                               the crisis facing our current education system, stating, ‘In the last

356                                                                                                                                                       357
five years participation in craft-related GCSEs fell by 25% and the         model: CPD sessions at the partner HEI teach new craft skills which are
number of higher education craft courses fell by 46%.’ (Crafts Council,     reinforced through collaborative delivery of sessions in their classrooms
2014). Nearly five years later the picture has worsened.                    alongside professional maker-educators. Maker-educators work closely
                                                                            with teachers to pass on skills to Key Stage 3 students and give young
In August last year analysis by the Cultural Learning Alliance showed       people an insight into craft careers.
further declines in entry numbers for arts GCSE and A Levels most
significantly a 57% decline in Design and Technology GCSE entries           The focus of Make Your Future in Yorkshire is inspired by Yorkshire’s rich
between 2010 to 2018. (Cultural Learning Alliance, 2018). This is           textile heritage and has seen schools paired with The School of Design
compounded by a continuing decline in arts A Levels: entries down           at The University of Leeds and Leeds Arts University. Learning from the
24% since 2010 (with a 6% decline in Art & Design and a 41% decline in      project’s pilot year has fed into the development of Make Your Future’s
Design & Technology A level entries in the same period).                    STEAM approach; makers worked with teachers to design sessions that
                                                                            illuminate the science and technology inherent to 3D making processes.
In addition to the decline in pupils selecting design subjects research
highlights that there have been cuts to lesson time, staff or facilities    Why knitting now?
in Design and Technology A-level subjects over the past two years           Knit Design Research was approached to facilitate CPD and school-
(ASCL, 2018). This situation is further compounded by trends including      based workshops focused on knitting as a making process and as a tool
a shortened key stage three (2 years rather than 3 years), shorter lesson   to integrate craft and design into the wider STEAM curriculum. The role
times and an arts ‘carousel system’ with arts subjects being given only     of maker-educator also provided a vehicle to disseminate the design
one, or half, term on the timetable.                                        outcomes of knit design research with a new audience, encouraging
                                                                            debate about the positive environmental change that can be achieved
The wider issue of teacher recruitment and retention is particularly        through textile design research. In addition this included the importance
concerning for our art & design teachers (In 2018 only 73% of the Art       of creativity for employability, and twenty-first century skills such the
& Design target, and 25% of Design & Technology were recruited)             ability to take risks in work and the importance of communication skills.
(Cultural Learning Alliance, 2019). Alongside the factors above, a lack     Perhaps most importantly, the project aimed to remind pupils about the
of access to relevant CPD in art and design is damaging. Significant        joy of making.
numbers of art and design specialists in all phases ‘rarely or never’                                                                                      Figure 1.
receive CPD. 55% of art and design teachers across all schools sectors                                                                                     project
said in the last five years they had considered leaving or had left the                                year 7, 8, and 9 school                             participants
profession (NSEAD, 2016).                                                                                       pupils


Make Your Future
Make Your Future is a response to this landscape: initiating networks
of schools, Higher Education Institutions (HEIs), and makers in London,                                         Knit
                                                                                            public:                              art, design
Birmingham and Yorkshire, to develop sustainable working models for                        families,           Design                and
                                                                                             wider            Research           technology
craft education.
                                                                                          community                               teachers
Make Your Future’s long-term aims are to create conditions where:

      • Schools offer students high quality craft learning as part of the
        curriculum.                                                                                        school senior
      • Young people from diverse backgrounds have improved their                                          management
        well-being by engaging with craft-making activities.
      • Local and national craft education networks support high quality
        craft opportunities in schools.
                                                                            Project participants.
The programme is distinctive due to its focus on hands-on craft skills      The project participants (figure 1) were selected from Yorkshire based
in the secondary classroom and the exploration of craft as a cross-         secondary schools with a high pupil premium. This was further divided
curricular bridge which draws together science, technology, and             into four distinct but related areas: year 7, 8 and 9 pupils, art and design
creative subjects. Teachers are at the heart of the Make Your Future        teachers, senior school management and the wider community.

358                                                                                                                                                                  359
Year 7, 8 and 9 pupils were important participants; the project took          stated that they had little time to participate in personal development
place before GCSE subject selection, to make pupils aware of the              of textiles skills. Firstly, teachers learnt how to use the hand operated
benefits of studying a design course. The second group of participants        and CNC industrial knitting machines in the School of Design. Through
were art, design and technology teachers. One key finding from                this practice-based approach the participants were introduced to the
research was the lack of professional development opportunities for           unique properties of knitted fabrics. Whilst the participating teachers
teachers, so a stand-alone CPD programme was developed to enhance             enjoyed the session, they could not see the relevance of knit on their
subject specific skills in knit design. As this is a specialist area within   teaching practice at this stage. Despite this it was important to ensure
textile design, the intention was to introduce a variety of approaches        that teachers had this understanding of knitted fabric and it also
that could complement existing teaching. In addition CPD introduced           generated an excitement for the materials and techniques.
interdisciplinary science and design methodologies to support a new
STEAM educational focus.                                                      Further CPD sessions demonstrated how these concepts could be
                                                                              used in the classroom. Two colour repeat patterns were produced on
The third group of participants were the school senior management             domestic, hand operated knitting machines. An equipment audit of
teams. One ambition was to engage with schools at a management                participating schools highlighted that although some schools had these
level, to change the perception of design as a subsidiary subject,            machines available, no staff members had the skill to use them. The
and demonstrate the value of thinking through making as a core of             repeat pattern project was structured so that it could be delivered to
the curriculum. Finally, it was important to engage with the families of      pupils over several sessions. A design was created using collage, and
the pupils involved. Parental influence is key in subject choices and so      this was tested as a repeat using a quartering method. The design was
the project had to communicate the relevance of design in the wider           transferred to a punch-card and finally knitted through to create an all-
curriculum but also the potential of employability within the textiles        over repeat fabric.
industry, which remains an important employer in Yorkshire.
                                                                              In the final session only hand processes were used. Teachers were taught
Over the course of two years teams of teachers from sixteen schools           a freehand loop construction process which created “ropes” of knitted
across the region attended CPD at The University of Leeds. Make               fabric. The importance of material choices was demonstrated through
Your Future’s maker educator team delivered workshops in all sixteen          the experimental use of yarns in this process. Working in groups, the
schools, with knit-focussed work taking place in five schools, Thomas a       ropes were knitted together, again using hand process, to form large
Beckett, Wakefield, Guiseley School, Beckfoot Upper Heaton, Bradford,         scale textile canopies, using integral shaping and tensioning to create
Leeds City Academy, and Allerton Grange, Leeds. These schools                 three-dimensional form (figure 2).
offered textile design as part of the key stage 3 Design and Technology
curriculum however none of the school delivered any knit content                                                                                          Figure 2.
                                                                                                                                                          CPD with
within the textiles curriculum and not all of the schools achieved the
                                                                                                                                                          teachers ex-
pupil numbers required to run a GCSE textiles programme. The major                                                                                        ploring form
challenge highlighted by schools was the ability to engage pupils with a                                                                                  using free-
creative curriculum beyond the traditional product-based approach. As                                                                                     hand loop
design researchers we were keen to work together to offer alternative                                                                                     construction
methods to introduce knit and develop resources that could adapt and                                                                                      processes.
evolve within the schools.

Make Your Future delivery
The project was delivered in three strands, CPD for teachers, in-school
workshops with pupils and a regional exhibition of work produced by
all participating schools.

CPD activity
A programme of knit specific CPD was held at the School of Design,            Throughout the sessions the use of knit as a thinking process were
University of Leeds over three sessions. Prior to the first session           stressed and explicit links to other areas of the curriculum were made.
teachers were asked to complete a skills audit. Analysis of the skills        The concept of knit as a product was avoided.
audit highlighted that although most of the participants were educated
to a first-degree level in design, few had experience of knit and most

360                                                                                                                                                                361
In-School workshops                                                                           Workshop 2: The nature of knitting
Whilst the CPD session were planned and facilitated by Jane Scott and                         This workshop applied biomimetic principles derived from plant growth
Elizabeth Gaston, the programme of workshops delivered in schools was                         models to textile design using knit process. With direct links to the
much more flexible. The content was co-designed by the teachers who                           biology curriculum, the workshop began with analysis of how plants
were looking for activities that were be achievable over a short period                       grow from individual cells into complex and varied forms. Using an
of time and that would integrate aspects of the wider curriculum. The                         indoor greenhouse with a selection of plants, pupils analysed the forms
workshops were developed around research questions central to the                             of leaves and flowers, and in groups they considered how the forms
work of Knit Design Research, and this flexibility provided a significant                     could be interpreted in 3D using knitting.
opportunity to change thinking through knit as a medium.
                                                                                              Plant morphology, through the process of differential growth has
Workshop 1: Colour, light and pattern                                                         significant connections to the way that a knitted fabric is produced;
The workshop investigated the effect of incident light quality on the                         stitch by stitch, and course by course (Scott, 2018). A knitted fabric
perception of colour viewed and consequently the effect of colour on                          is generated from an individual loop of yarn, inter-looped with those
pattern perception (Gaston, 2016). Pupils were introduced to knitting                         around it through repeated patterns of knitted stitches to produce
using freehand loop-construction processes and produced lengths                               a continuous and interconnected surface. This process is inherently
of knitted rope. During this session students recorded the effect of                          sustainable. Rather than cutting out shapes from lengths of fabric,
material use on the properties of the knitted rope. The knitted rope was                      knit design enables each shaped piece to be produced to the correct
used in two ways, demonstrating the effect of changing manufacturing                          dimensions, with no waste. Using knitting, material can be placed
parameters on fabric quality. Working in pairs, pupils produced self-                         exactly where required to produce the necessary form and drape for
supporting knitted vessels. Larger groups of pupils used the same                             the outcome.
material create an open, large scale knitted canopy. The importance of
colour in design and how the perception of colour changes in different                        Over two days the year 8 pupils worked in small groups to reconsider
lighting conditions was analysed by pupils using coloured light to                            textile design using the differential growth models observed in plants
explore the difference in the patterns created (STEAM connections to                          as a programming tool to explore the potential to design complex 3D
physics).                                                                                     forms using conventional knitting techniques (figure 8 & 9). Students
                                                                                              undertook analytical studies and interpreted their findings into fabric.
                                                                            Figure 3. ana-    Outcomes of the workshop included a range of knitted samples, many
                                                                            lysing hand-      of which closely resembled the plant forms that acted as inspiration
                                                                            made knitted      (figure 8, 10 &11).
                                                                            ropes as a
                                                                            group.
                                                                                              Workshop 3: Knit manufacture; 4 days 4 technologies
                                                                            Figure 4.         Moving from hand knit processes to CNC knitting this workshop
                                                                            Working           introduced pupils to a variety of ways to produce fabric, resulting in
                                                                            together to       the digital design of three installation pieces incorporating self-portraits
                                                                            Design and        inspired by Julien Opie (figure 12 and 13). This workshop was process
                                                                            make forms.
                                                                                                                                                                             Figure 8. Im-
                                                                            Figure 5. Knit-                                                                                  ages of bo-
                                                                            ted outcome                                                                                      tanical source
                                                                                                                                                                             materials,
                                                                            Figure 6.                                                                                        visual analysis
                                                                            Assembled                                                                                        of growth
                                                                            Canopy                                                                                           and form,
                                                                                                                                                                             final design
                                                                            Figure 7.                                                                                        response.
                                                                            Pupils testing
                                                                            light effects
                                                                            of tensioned
                                                                            canopy in the
                                                                            dance studio.



362                                                                                                                                                                                     363
                                                                             Figure 9.         and spatial context. Feedback from the exhibition was very positive
                                                                             Thinking          with attendance from pupils, teachers, parents and families and school
                                                                             through           senior management teams.
                                                                             making in the
                                                                             Classroom.
                                                                                               Evaluation
                                                                             Figure 10. De-    Make Your Future is evaluated using a Theory of Change model
                                                                             veloping 3d       developed by the Crafts Council and Flow, an external evaluation
                                                                             Knitted forms.    agency. The evaluation framework employs a range of data collection
                                                                                               methods to assess the impact of the project on teachers, students and
                                                                             Figure 11.        wider school networks.
driven, emphasising that whilst different levels of technology could         Assembly line;
be used for production, the knitted fabric outcomes had the same             fabrics assem-
properties. Three days of the workshop took place in school, working         bled to cactus    What changed as a result of CPD?
from the simplest freehand loop production properties to machine             form inspired     A teacher survey was administered before, during and after the project
knitting using domestic knitting machines. The final day of the workshop     by indoor         to assess the impact of the process on teachers. In addition to this,
took place at the University of Leeds and the students experienced           greenhouse.       the impact of the project can be demonstrated through informal
industrial hand and CNC controlled knitting machines. This enabled the                         conversations, emails and through the actions taken following both
workshop to integrate a range of STEAM content relating to materials,                          CPD and the school workshops.
manufacturing and digital design.                                                              The teachers were clearly engaged with knit as a process, within 24
                                                                                               hours of the CPD sessions, researchers received images of knitting in the
                                                                             Figure 12.
                                                                             Workshop 3.
                                                                                               classroom. All teachers reported an increased confidence in using knit
                                                                             CAD Self-por-     within the curriculum and could see how the skills delivered through the
                                                                             traits.           CPD sessions were directly applicable to a classroom. Re-engagement
                                                                                               with textiles practice was evident in much of the teacher reflection. A
                                                                             Figure 13.        baseline score of 5/10 as a response to “How confident are you to teach
                                                                             Workshop 3.       a textile craft” before the CPD increased to 8/10 after the sessions.
                                                                             Detail from
                                                                             Knitted Instal-
                                                                                                  “I would just like to say how good the CDP has been at
                                                                             lation.
                                                                                                  Leeds University. It has been very inspiring on a personnel
                                                                                                  and professional level. Thank you for the high standard of
Exhibition                                                                                        preparation and teaching to enable to succeed in the tasks in
The work from the workshops was presented at a professionally curated                             such a short space of time” (Textiles Teacher, Thomas a Beckett
exhibition at Leeds Arts University (2018) and the University of Leeds                            School, Wakefield).
(2019). Pupils, parents and senior staff were invited to a private view
where pupils received certificates of participation. In addition pupils                        An unexpected but welcome outcome was the formation of a network of
attended a day of textile workshops which in 2019 focussed on a design/                        textiles teachers who shared practice through an email chain, furthering
technology interface. The knitted fabrics were exhibited as installations                      their in-school support.
                                                                             Figure 14.
and hanging as a collection of vessels in the exhibition (Figure 14, 15      Biomimicry
and 16). This provided an additional view on knit presented in an artistic   knitting on       What changed for the pupils?
                                                                             display at        Each workshop began with pupils asked to draw a response to the
                                                                             exhibition        question ‘what is knitting?’ The drawings included hats, scarves and
                                                                                               jumpers. By the end of each session each group had been presented
                                                                             Figure 15:        with a completely different perspective of what knitting is, and why it is
                                                                             Canopies          an important making process now. Final feedback demonstrated how
                                                                             exhibited as
                                                                                               much they had learnt from the experience. At the end of each session
                                                                             large installa-
                                                                             tion              pupils responded to one or two individual questions such as:

                                                                             Figure 16:           • What did you do that was creative?
                                                                             Vessels exhib-       • Did you use maths in your work?
                                                                             ited as hang-        • What did you do that was innovative?
                                                                             ing exhibit
                                                                                        .
364                                                                                                                                                                         365
Pupils answered articulately and confidently, demonstrating a high level      formal setting, with the same pupils. It had allowed her to get to know
of technical understanding:                                                   her pupils better and gave her an improved insight into their needs
                                                                              (Art Teacher, Allerton Grange School). Feedback from pupils also
      “I have learnt how to use the knitting machine and how to hand          demonstrated that their relationships with their teachers had improved.
      knit. I even learnt the different designs like Fair Isle and jacquard
      and materials such as acrylic.” (Pupil, Year 8.)                        What changed for families?
                                                                              Many pupils asked to take materials home so that they could
However informal feedback also demonstrated that students could see           demonstrate their new skills to their families, returning the next day with
the benefit of a creative education in careers such as medicine and           work produced by siblings and parents. This increased engagement
law. The development of twenty-first century skills such as collaborative     from families has the potential to influence the uptake of creative
working was also evident from the feedback:                                   subjects at GCSE and A level. One school reported that the project had
                                                                              created a buzz around the school and they had an increase in uptake of
      “I enjoyed the canopy the most because it gives us all a chance         the GCSE textiles option and could run an A level textiles course after
      to put our work into a school project” (Pupil, Year 7.)                 not having enough pupils at either level the previous year.

Similarly, with risk taking, initially students wanted to control their own   The main impact for families was evident during the final exhibition.
work but as the projects developed, they were happy to cede control           Approximately 50 parents attended the private view of the exhibition
to the group to produce a more impactful outcome.                             each year. Families travelling from Wakefield, Guiseley and Bradford to
                                                                              view the student work. This is significant not only due to the distance
The visit to the University of Leeds was very impactful, during a tour        travelled from Wakefield and Bradford, some families had never visited
of facilities one student spontaneously stood at the front of a lecture       Leeds city centre before, but also because the exhibition happened
theatre and delivered a lecture on what she had learnt during the             several weeks after the workshops. This demonstrates that sustained
project. Several students indicated that they would now consider higher       interest and excitement in the project can be maintained beyond the
education and a career in textiles.                                           classroom through additional voluntary participation. High quality
                                                                              work was displayed to professional standards. This allowed parents to
An unexpected outcome for the teachers was that pupils who are                understand how creative thinking can impact product and widen their
behaviourally challenging engaged with the project and demonstrated           experience of design.
persistence and concentration. At one school the project enabled an
autistic pupil to engage in a mainstream school activity, to the surprise     What changed for School Management Teams?
of his teachers.                                                              In all cases the School management team engaged with the project. In
                                                                              the planning stage there had been indications available contact time
What changed for art, design and technology teachers?                         would be limited, however in practice all schools gave their pupils as
Teachers could demonstrate their improved skills in textiles and              much time as needed on the project. At all schools, members of staff from
confidence to try new approaches to learning in the classroom, critical       different subjects came to join in and in one school the pupils taught the
in widening the taught curriculum and demonstrating what a STEAM              head teacher to knit using freehand loop construction processes. This
curriculum could be.                                                          head teacher saw the value of the project and proposed to develop an
                                                                              annual arts week for all pupils and create arts ambassadors. In another
      “The pleasure was all ours, what a great week and fantastic             school a biology teacher demonstrated a full-scale, working model
      outcomes! Thanks so much for all the hard work, planning and            of a knitted digestive system. Knit was important in its manufacture
      time you both put into it. It really was a success because of           as it allowed the production of a continuous three-dimensional tube
      your great ideas and knowledge, so thank you!” (Art Teacher,            using different materials. It allowed pupils to understand the scale of
      Guiseley School).                                                       the digestive system and its position in the body and demonstrates a
                                                                              perfect example of a STEAM curriculum.
Changes in one Yorkshire school as a result of the project included the
reintroduction of GCSE textiles and A level textiles in the year following    Make Your Future programme outputs.
the project due to increased numbers.                                         Nationally the Make Your Future programme has succeeded in
                                                                              engaging with the delivery of art and design education through craft
Again, there were unexpected outcomes. One teacher commented                  and making processes at key stage 3. The success of the project has
that she had enjoyed working for an extended period of time, in a less        seen the number of schools participating in the project increase from 16

366                                                                                                                                                         367
schools in Year 1 to 23 schools in year 2. The demographics have been        Conclusions
diverse; with an average of 44% pupils in receipt of Pupil Premium,          Can reintroducing craft into the classroom change the perceptions of
and engagement with 4 special schools including 1 SEMH (Social,              textile design by repositioning making as a tool for thinking? Evidence
Emotional, and Mental Health SEN), 1 specialist autistic school and 1        from this intervention developed by Knit Design Research as part of the
School for the Deaf.                                                         Make Your Future programme would suggest that it can. Each group
                                                                             that participated in the project demonstrated new knowledge and a
The CPD programme was extremely well attended, providing a total of          greater understanding of textile processes as a result of both the CPD
494 hours of CPD across the country in year 1 and 690 hours of CPD           for teachers and the workshops for pupils.
in year 2. The total number of pupils that participated in the project
increased from 915 in year 1 to 1756 in year 2.                              For Knit Design Research, working with secondary schools and the Crafts
                                                                             Council offered a new perspective on their research. The application
Future Craft Education strategy                                              of diverse methodologies including biomimicry and performance craft
The delivery of Make Your Future has provided the Crafts Council with        as methods to introduce the subject of sustainability from alternative
a series of important partnerships and rich knowledge of delivering          perspectives was very successful. Students were able to see how
craft education with schools. Applying the research from Your Future is      science, art and design could inspire each other, and techniques such
in the Making has been critical and implementing the findings though         as the indoor greenhouse (workshop 2) provided direct contact with
the Make Your Future programme has delivered a measurable change             source materials to work from.
to art and design education in the participating schools. However to
demonstrate a lasting change in the art and design curriculum, Make          As design researchers, knit is a way of thinking about materials,
Your Future must underpin the development of a broader strategy for          technology and scale, not restricted by technology or limited to a
craft education across all phases. This will include:                        specific outcome. By bringing this open and experimental approach in
                                                                             schools, and to CPD sessions, thinking and making formed the central
      • Testing the Make Your Future model in three new geographical         activities, and discussions and ideas were able to evolve from this
        areas, considering, for example, what new challenges we might        active process. For lasting change within the art and design curriculum,
        encounter delivering the project in a rural setting, and what        craft processes offer a method to reintroduce skill, risk and problem
        measures are required to ensure the same impact? What                solving into the classroom. The global challenges presented by the
        happens when we change our regional partner from a HEI               textile industry require creative solutions, however these problems
        to a different type of organisation? How can we link Make            present a huge opportunity for innovation when supported by deep
        Your Future into other significant initiatives? Does this type       understanding of materials and making processes. Make Your Future
        of strategic implementation make a difference to the project’s       provides an excellent short term model for intervention at key stage
        sustainability or approach?                                          three, engaging secondary school pupils, their families, teachers, and
      • The development of a Make Your Future franchise model, for           school management in reactivating craft and making in school as a
        potential management by regional partners                            change agent across the curriculum. It will inform the development of a
      • The growth of Crafts Council’s Artmark Partner offer                 longer term solution that must include government strategy.
      • The relaunch of our Your Future is in the Making, and associated
        digital offer
      • The development of a broader CPD offer for craft educators,
      • A more robust craft careers offer, linked to the national Creative
        Careers Programme

Impact in Yorkshire
As a result of the exhibition Elizabeth Gaston was approached by Leeds
City Council to develop a similar project in collaboration with Leeds
Arts University for delivery at primary school level. Initial research has
included an information gathering day of craft practice with primary
teachers leading to a funding application.




368                                                                                                                                                     369
References

ASCL, 2018. Funding Crisis puts A level music and languages in peril. [online] [accessed
1 May 2019]. https://www.ascl.org.uk/news-and-views/news_news-detail.funding-crisis-
puts-a-level-music-and-languages-in-peril.html
Black, S. 2013. The Sustainable Fashion Handbook. London: Thames and Hudson.
Charter, M and Tischner, U. 2001. Sustainable Solutions: developing products and
services for the future. Sheffield: Green Leaf.
Crafts Council, 2014. Our Future is in the Making. [online] [accessed 1 May 2019].
Available from https://www.craftscouncil.org.uk/what-we-do/education-manifesto/
Cultural Learning Alliance, 2018. Further Decline in Arts GCSE and A level entries.
[online] [accessed 1 May 2019]. https://culturallearningalliance.org.uk/further-decline-
in-arts-gcse-and-a-level-entries/
Cultural Learning Alliance, 2019. Policy and Practice Round Up. [online] [accessed
1 May 2019]. https://culturallearningalliance.org.uk/policy-and-practice-round-up-
january-2019/
European Commission. 2013. Sustainability of Textiles. Retail forum for Sustainability
[online] [Accessed 29 Jan 2019]. Available from: http://ec.europa.eu/environment/
industry/retail/pdf/issuepapertextile.pdf
Fabians, 2019. Primary Colours Report. [online] [Accessed 29 Jan 2019]. https://fabians.
org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2019/01/FS-Primary-Colours-Report-WEB-FINAL.pdf
Fletcher, K. 2008. Sustainable Fashion and Textiles; Design Journeys. 1st edition,
London: Earthscan.
Gaston, E. 2016. Performance Craft, PhD thesis, The University of Leeds.
McQuaid, M. 2005. Extreme Textiles, Princeton Architectural Press.
NSEAD, 2016. Survey Report. [online] [Accessed 29 Jan 2019]. http://www.nsead.org/
downloads/APPG_Survey_report_Sophie_(9Feb2016).pdf
Scott, J. 2017. Programmable Knitting, In ed. Tibbit, S. 2017. Active Matter, Boston:
MIT Press.
Spencer, D. 2001. Knitting Technology, London: Woodhead Publishing.




370                                                                                        371
             Intervention
                  without
          imperialism: An
      equitable approach
       to design research
                   Nneka Sobers
372                          373
Abstract                                                                                                                                                Figure 1.
Design, as an act of intervention, has the power to either perpetuate or                                                                                Arnstein’s
                                                                                                                                                        Ladder of
dismantle systems of marginalization. Although the design’s intention
                                                                                                                                                        Participation
may be to help those in need, the act of helping may repackage structures                                                                               (Models of
of neo-colonialism. A person who has the power to help vulnerable                                                                                       Participation)
communities possesses inherent privileges that directly or indirectly
may create a relationship of control, dependence, and exploitation.
Although the unbalanced power dynamic may be unintentional, it is
the role of an equity-minded designer to consciously transfer power by
supporting vulnerable communities, rather than saving them.

This paper examines a hybridized and anti-exploitative design research
methodology that is unpacked through a case study of a community
in Accra, Ghana. Through equity, self-determination, deep dialogue,
and context-sensitivity, the design research approach resulted in the
co-creation of a grassroots organized waste management system. In
addition to achieving a collaborative design solution, the case study
reflects on further notions of the role and mechanics of dismantling
systems of oppression as a socially-conscious designer.

Introduction                                                                 Interventions that are the most transformative harness the power of
Rooted in the idea of community and camaraderie, humanitarianism is          those who are marginalized by creating a process where the community
the act of members of a community to assist another community that           in need is authentically valued and engaged. Rather than perpetuating
is unable to help themselves (Barnett 2011). Although intervening to         invisible systems of power through non-participation and tokenism,
help a vulnerable community may seem altruistic, help that is provided       encompassing citizen power is the ultimate way of applying justice to
by a community of privilege may be a harmful exercise of dominance.          an unbalanced system of power.
The traditional approaches to intervention are rigidly top-down,
lack inclusive and authentic local engagement, and resources may             By emphasizing process over product and supporting rather than
not be adequately disseminated due to a lack of accountability and           leading, design research can restructure new relationships between
coordination. This model of humanitarianism increases exploitation and       communities in need and those with the power to help. A new anti-
unsustainable resource dependency of the recipient, which ultimately         exploitative design research paradigm, can challenge the presumptions
reinforces a paternalistic power dynamic. The indirect, subtle, or           of the privileged and dismantle the root of systemic issues, rather than
unintentional reinforcement of the interventionist having more power         simply responding to proximate causes of societal injustices.
than the aid recipient(s) is a form of neo-colonialism. Since design is      This paper explores the principles and tools that create a new paradigm
grounded in responding to human needs, holding design accountable            for anti-exploitative and equity-driven design research. The principles
as an intervention and rethinking its role is essential in making positive   and tools introduced through my anti-exploitative process will be
change without repackaging structures of neo-colonialism.                    examined in the story of the Ayawaso East community of Accra, Ghana.
With the 2000 revival of Ken Garland’s “First Things First Manifesto”,       Due to a history of informal settlement patterns and limited municipal
there has been a shift in design emphasizing social context, rather than     capacity, Ayawaso East’s residents lack adequate essential municipal
producing commercial outputs (Abdulla 2014). Since design research           services, such as waste management. Tired of waiting for inadequate top-
contextualizes the system that a design intervention is embedded in, this    down interventions to improve local waste infrastructure, the residents
systematic inquiry provides an opportunity for designers to challenge        of Ayawaso East would like to harness the power of local human capital
and restructure systems of power embedded in design interventions.           and grassroots organizing to improve their waste management system.
In order to dismantle unequal power relationships between marginalized       Although top-down stakeholders dismissed Ayawaso East’s informal
communities and those considered as the “expert”, design interventions       organizing endeavors as insignificant, Ayawaso East’s community action
should be held accountable based on how it achieves opportunities            is drastically helping residents reduce their risk of displacement and
for equity, self-determination, deep dialogue, and context-sensitivity.      environmental degradation. Inspired by the passion of Ayawaso East’s
Illustrated in Arnstein’s Ladder of Citizen Participation (Figure 1),        residents, I explored how design research catalyzed positive social,
there is a gradient of the quality and equity of design interventions.
374                                                                                                                                                               375
economic, service, and environmental change, which resulted in the co-                          Contrary to the initial aspirations of Northern Ghanaian migrants
creation of a grassroots-operated waste management system for one of                            temporarily moving to the zongo, many migrants permanently settled
Accra’s most vulnerable communities.                                                            in Nima. Due to their religious and cultural differences, Nima’s migrant
                                                                                                population faced social and economic discrimination. As residents were
Ayawaso East: Case Study                                                                        excluded from participating in the mainstream economy, residents of
As a way to explore the intricacies and potential of design as a tool for                       Nima started establishing their own local business, which has contributed
dismantling systems of oppression, I will reflect on my 2018-2019 work                          to a robust insular economy and active community organizing.
in Accra, Ghana.
                                                                                                                                                                            Figure 3.
                                                                                                                                                                            Land Use
Home to 4 million people, Ghana’s capital city of Accra has experienced                                                                                                     Map
exponential economic growth and social progress in the past 20 years
(Overview 2019). As one of the world’s fastest-growing economies
(McDonnell 2018), Accra houses the country’s most powerful institutions
juxtaposed to some of Ghana’s most vulnerable communities. As Accra
continues to grow, the city struggles with navigating how to improve
the quality of life for its residents, while mitigating negative externalities
of urban upgrading. Consequently, such rapid urban growth has
resulted in controversial development and institutional voids that have
disproportionately impacted marginalized communities, especially
Ayawaso East.

Occupying an area of 2.5 km2 and housing over 95,000 residents, the
Ayawaso East Municipality is the most densely populated community
in Accra, especially Zones I, II, and III (Figure 2). Ayawaso East contains
several neighborhoods, but its most identifiable neighborhood
includes “Nima”, which is referred to as a Zongo, which translates to
“traveler’s camp” in Hausa. Today, Zongos have become a vast network
of settlements across Ghana’s urban centers; however, Nima is reputed
to be the most notorious Zongo in Accra due to its population size, low
income, perceived high crime rates, and large-scale waste management
problem.
                                                                                 Figure 2.
                                                                                 Regional Map




                                                                                                Due to the population increase and informal settlement patterns
                                                                                                (Figure 3), Nima being characterized as the densest and haphazardly
                                                                                                built neighborhood in Accra (Kang 2010). As a result of the irregular
                                                                                                development and street network that has extended from Nima to
                                                                                                Ayawaso East, accessibility is extremely limited. The network of
                                                                                                narrow alleys makes it difficult for residents to traverse through their
376                                                                                                                                                                                     377
                                                                         Figure 4.                                                                                  Figure 5.
                                                                         Accessibility                                                                              Waste
                                                                         Map                                                                                        Infrastructure
                                                                                                                                                                    Map




neighborhood and access essential services, such as emergency                            Sometimes, residents walk more than ten minutes throw away their
medical response and waste pick-up (Figure 4).                                           waste in informal communal receptacles and pay more than GH¢10-
                                                                                         15 (USD $2-3) to throw away a week’s worth of domestic waste
Although Alliance Waste is the official provider of waste services in                    (approximately 120 liters). Residents who are unable to afford the Pay-
Ayawaso East, the community’s narrow streets make it impossible for                      As-You-Go (PAYG) waste fee or walk to a communal waste bin resort to
Alliance Waste’s expansive fleet to pick up waste (Mingle 2018). Since                   paying a disproportionately higher fee to throw away less waste; burn
Alliance Waste’s existing waste fleet cannot access Ayawaso East’s                       waste; or litter. Since many of residents are unable to afford the PAYG
residential interior, Alliance Waste only services several communal                      waste fee, littering, especially in public spaces, has caused extreme a
waste bins located on the peripheral neighborhood roads (Figure 5).                      public health and environmental hazard.
These communal waste bins are leased to bin operators who charge
residents to throw away their waste.                                                     As a way to reduce litter and overcome Ayawaso East’s infrastructural
                                                                                         constraints, there have been controversial top-down interventions, which
                                                                                         have sparked grassroots counteraction. Due to an active local economy,

378                                                                                                                                                                           379
urban centrality, proximity to the home of Ghana’s President and Vice                                                                                     Figure 6.
President, and relatively low land values, Ayawaso East has become                                                                                        Process
an attractive site for luxury real estate development. Prospective real                                                                                   Sanitation
                                                                                                                                                          Team
estate development is perceived as a catalytic opportunity to upgrade
the challenging infrastructure conditions of Ayawaso East. Although
attracting upper-class development would encourage developers to
build new roads, sturdy housing developments, and adequate waste
management, such top-down development would apply immense
pressure of displacement and gentrification on Ayawaso East’s existing
population.

There have been several non-commercial interventions to directly
improve Ayawaso East’s infrastructure conditions; however, previous
attempts have not been successful. The most significant top-down
public-sector intervention is the incompletion of the 2016 Nima
Drain project. After years of public planning and limited community
engagement, National and City agencies declared a plan convert
the local stream into a road and covered sewage system in effort to
improve vehicular access and reduce litter from contaminating the local
water source. Although part of the road infrastructure has been built, a
pending political dispute has resulted in halting the project indefinitely.
Consequently, it is uncertain when critical waste management and
sewage infrastructure will be implemented.

Although the government and private organizations have a formal and
top-down approach to waste management in Accra, their interventions
and politics have failed the essential needs of Ayawaso East’s residents.
Frustrated by how the politics and controversy amongst privileged
stakeholders have resulted in depriving the residents of Ayawaso East
of adequate infrastructure, residents have informally organized as an
alternative way to improve their environment and protect themselves
from displacement.
                                                                              Process Sanitation Team collects upwards of 2,250 liters of litter, which
Founded in 2010 by local resident, Ahmed Yaajalaal, VOiCE CIC is a            equates to about nine 250-liter household waste bins.
center for local governance, leadership, and research dedicated to
promoting youth participation in decision making and facilitating the         Through the support of VOiCE CIC, Pride of the East school, and
implementation of socio-economic development projects in Ayawaso              numerous local residents, Process Sanitation Team has gained great
East (VOiCE 2018). In addition to engaging the community from within,         momentum. Such prolific and bootstrapped community support reflects
VOiCE CIC works closely with a diverse set of stakeholders to promote         how the residents of Ayawaso East are eager to support initiatives
transparency, accountability, equality, and self-reliance in Accra, Ghana.    that help improve the health of their community and promote their
Since VOiCE CIC serves as a central local community resource, they are        autonomy.
well-connected and support other grassroots initiatives in the Ayawaso
East. The most robust VOiCE CIC-affiliated initiatives addressing local       Being a low-income and a majority Muslim community, residents, like
waste management issues is “Process Sanitation Team” (Figure 6).              Abu and Process Sanitation Team, do not have a lot of money and
                                                                              are unable to receive loans with interest, which limits the Team from
Established in 2017, Abubakari “Abu” Issaka, a popular local activist,        accessing money to purchase materials needed to implement and scale
leads a volunteer-based waste pickup service. Every three-five days, Abu      their waste management initiative. Due to the constraints that systemic
and his team identify and clean several blocks of their neighborhood,         marginalization and extractive top-down interventions have created,
especially around the Nima Drain. Within a 1-hour clean-up session,           Process Sanitation Team must find resilient ways to scale their crucial
                                                                              services. By relying on the trust and strength of their neighbors, the
380                                                                                                                                                                    381
creation of Ayawaso East’s alternative and grassroots waste system is                                                                                        Figure 7 Anti-
the ultimate act of resilience.                                                                                                                              Exploitative
                                                                                                                                                             Design
                                                                                                                                                             Methodology
Design Approach
The story of Ayawaso East is a universal narrative of how a lack of access
and misguided design interventions can perpetuate the marginalization
of vulnerable communities. It is also a story of how community networks
and grassroots initiatives are essential in filling the gaps of institutional
voids. Community mobilization, as a form of social resilience, is a critical
tool that is most common in marginalized communities. According to
Gregory Fairchild, segregation has led to opportunities for marginalized
peoples with limited resources because those who are marginalized
have more tactic knowledge of the community’s needs rather than
outsiders. Ultimately, marginalized communities are able to reinforce
trust and bounded solidarity within their communities, rather than an
outsider externally imposing these bonds. Therefore, as a socially-             a positivist approach, rather than “what needs to be fixed”, a deficit-
conscious designer who wants to help, it is crucial to erase the “I” and        based approach, shifts the role of the design interventionist from
“them” dichotomy and engage in a process that is collectively defined           being a design savior to supporting the community to make self-
by “us”.                                                                        determined change. “It reframes the project to one that is mutual-
                                                                                “acknowledge[ing] users as active participants and partners rather than
Motivated by utilizing design as a catalyst for social impact, especially       as passive repositories of “lore” to be [mined]” (Abdullah 2014).
to help vulnerable communities like Ayawaso East, it is essential to
redesign the role and approach of a designer and their intervention.            In this section, I will introduce the anti-exploitative design research
Anyone who intervenes inherently possesses a position of power. As              methodology and explain how I integrated it into my work with the
a person who has the resources and expertise to use design as an                Ayawaso East community.
intervention, anyone who has the power to intervene should translate
their privilege into the power of enabling equity in an unjust system.          Stage 1- Dawn
Traditionally, design has invoked leader-centered assumptions and a             In contrast to the traditional design process of initiating research
deficit-based approach to problem-solving. Instead of positioning               by defining the problem, I initiated my research by researching and
the designer as the center of change, the anti-exploitative role of a           cultivating relationships needed to lay the foundation for change. By
designer is to become an ally and have a support-oriented process               embedding oneself in the community they are designing with, one
enabled by deep dialogue. As Paulo Freire warns, “leaders who do not            can build trust and co-establish an approach that embraces local
act dialogically, but insist on imposing their decisions, do not organize       knowledge, perspectives, and priorities.
the people–they manipulate them. They do not liberate, nor are they
liberated: they oppress”.                                                       Although some aspects of the “Dawn” stage can be completed
                                                                                remotely, the “Dawn” stage is most effective when conducted in person.
Hybridizing processes from user experience research, participatory              Therefore, fieldwork is essential for understanding a first-hand account
action research, and appreciative inquiry, I have developed a                   of the community’s context. Before my initial field visit to Ayawaso
comprehensive anti-exploitative design research methodology that                East, I researched the history of Accra and community organizations
promotes equity, self-determination, context-sensitivity, and design            in Ayawaso East, which serves as introductory knowledge to identify
resilience. Although design research processes may change depending             who would be ideal stakeholders to engage. Through my stakeholder
on the discipline and project parameters, my proposed design research           mapping exercise, I discovered the work that MCI created during their
method applies to all user-centered design.                                     Nima Drain project. Although MCI is a non-local stakeholder and a more
                                                                                neutral party in the Nima Drain project, they provided me with specific
As illustrated in Figure 7, the anti-exploitative approach to design            contact information on local partners and spatial data, which was critical
combines exploratory, generative, and evaluative research methods               information that was not readily available online. Not wanting to be
that foster trust, value, build on local-knowledge and problem-                 limited by MCI’s existing network, contacts provided by MCI provided
solving, and enable authentic choice-based and dialogic engagement.             an initial foray into building my unique network of connections in
Facilitating mutual engagement that emphasizes “what is working”,               Ayawaso East.

382                                                                                                                                                                    383
Upon arriving in Ayawaso East for fieldwork, I visited all potential local   While my contextual inquiry was designed to sample a diverse cross-
partners in-person, which is how I become acquainted with Ahmed              section of local residents, my interviews targeted specific community
Yaajalaal, Founder of VOiCE CIC. By being transparent about my               stakeholders. From interviewing local activists to business owners
research intentions, asking for permission to work with and engage           and government officials, my purpose was to identify the capacity,
local residents, and building trust within VOiCE CIC, Mr. Yaajalall then     perspective, and goals of each key stakeholder, which served as the
connected me with more community partners, which compounded                  foundation of my stakeholder mapping exercise (Figure 8).
into developing numerous deep relationships with local organizers and                                                                                      Figure 8:
residents, including Abu of Process Sanitation Team.                                                                                                       Waste
                                                                                                                                                           Service
Stage 2- Discover                                                                                                                                          Blueprint
In order to capture a story as complex as Ayawaso East, design research
must capture the community’s context by gathering and synthesizing
qualitative and quantitative data. During the “Discover” stage, the
overlay of data will begin to reveal trends, systems relationships,
motivations, priorities, and initiatives which can be interconnected and
augmented through the design process. By collecting many stories
from local and diverse stakeholders, these positive stories reveal
which existing community assets to expand on in order to overcome
contextual challenges.

When establishing my quantitative analysis, Ayawaso East’s existing
spatial data was limited to hand-collected GIS data gathered through
MCI’s Nima Drain project. Due to the common constraint of informal           In addition to interviewing 35 select stakeholders, I facilitated 5
communities lacking robust data and VOiCE CIC’s mission of collecting        focus groups, which ranged from 8-20 diverse residents per session.
more data on Ayawaso East, it was essential to utilize democratic            Appreciative of the time residents volunteered to help me, I hosted
data collecting tools to help the community update and improve their         the focus groups during manageable hours in easily accessible spaces
data collection. “For citizens to be able to influence decision-making       and provided snacks. The focus group activities included storytelling
in government or the private sector, they need to be able to access,         and documenting what inspires the participants to take action, how
use and control data relevant to them. In other words, they must be          participants get their neighbors to contribute to their cause, and
empowered by data” (Pawelke 2018).                                           challenges they may experience when organizing.

New tools that I introduced to VOiCE CIC and other residents who were        Stage 3- Define
interested in collecting data included free crowdsourcing tools such as      By eliminating any presumptions about the community’s context, the
Mapillary (platform for crowdsourcing geotagged photos) and QGIS             designer can equitably co-define what problem should be addressed.
(open-sourced geospatial tool).                                              Co-definition is key in eliminating the power imbalance been a designer
                                                                             and the community they are helping. By providing space for the
When gathering qualitative data on Ayawaso East, my primary methods          community to share their concerns, priorities, and ideas, the purpose
included contextual inquiry, interviews, focus groups, stakeholder           of the designer becomes more about what capacities, expertise, and
mapping, and geolocated photography. By having permission from               tools the designer may have to support the community’s aspirations for
community members established in the Dawn stage, I arranged to follow        the future.
50 diverse residents around for 1-8 hours of their day. By observing
consenting residents, I learned more about mundane aspects of their          By analyzing the data from qualitative research utilized in the Discover
everyday lives, the experience of living in Ayawaso East, and the issues     stage, I organized my discoveries using affinity mapping and service
they care about most. Through contextual inquiry’s semi-structured           blueprinting. The affinity mapping exercise unveiled that residents
format, I structured my inquiry by reintroducing myself, describing the      were most passionate about projects relating to improving their local
intentions of my work and collaboration, asking about pressing local         infrastructure, particularly waste management. The service blueprint
matters that residents care about, and ideas they had about overcoming       identified the actors, behaviors, and connectivity and gaps in the existing
such matters.                                                                local waste management service. Through a quantitative assessment,
                                                                             spatial patterns revealed that Ayawaso East’s informal settlement

384                                                                                                                                                                    385
pattern has made it difficult for resource vehicles, like waste trucks, to   waste, and tools that would help Process Sanitation Team overcome
serve the community. Due to the alarming amounts of waste in Ayawaso         labor and financial inconsistencies.
East and unsuccessful municipal action, residents were inspired to take
local action by picking up litter.                                           Inspired by Process Sanitation Team’s unique approach to filling in waste
                                                                             service gaps through volunteer litter clean up and upcycling plastic waste
Through volunteer assistance and donations, residents encourage              into public trash cans, animal feeders, and other community-specific
and recognize that the work of Process Sanitation Team is an essential       tools, I developed an urban design logistics guide and barter-enabled
service needed to overcome the precarious state of waste in Ayawaso          community organizing app that would help coordinate existing waste
East. Since Process Sanitation Team is a volunteer-based initiative; the     management initiatives and scale them to sustainably and efficiently
viability of the organization is dependent on people donating their time     remove more waste in Ayawaso East, all while maintaining community
and resources. Abu expresses his desire to make the organization more        ownership and autonomy of their grassroots-managed infrastructure
reliable and robust. “Although my community and I are passionate about       system.
the work of [Process Sanitation Team], it is sometimes hard because we
do not have enough [donated] money to throw away our trash after             The first tool designed to address Ayawaso East’s waste management
the clean-up. Or sometimes people cannot afford to volunteer because         context included a logistics guide to manage and uniquely utilize
they need money for their time. I wish there was a more reliable way to      locally-generated waste, “A Cleaner Nima” guide (Figure 9). Based
pay volunteers with water or other [resources] instead of money”, Abu        on urban design principles, the guide identifies priority sites of waste
stated.                                                                      cleanup, integrates local waste removal practices into a regional waste
                                                                             stream, develops strategies for waste upcycling, and establishes the
By uncovering and linking community needs (ie. waste management),            foundation for a circular waste-based economy.
existing positive assets (ie. Process Sanitation Team), and my design                                                                                     Figure 9.
capacity (ie. time, skills, and budget), active community stakeholders and                                                                                Urban
I co-defined the project scope as developing a way to extend Process                                                                                      Design
Sanitation Team to a sustainable community-run waste management                                                                                           Waste
system. Developing a problem statement and project objectives foster                                                                                      Manual (A
transparency between the designer and the community while holding                                                                                         Cleaner
the project to a set of standards that can be measured during the            Expanding on existing community behaviors, such as grassroots                Nima)
“Determine” phase of this process.                                           organizing enabled by social media broadcasting and informal
                                                                             bartering to overcome monetary constraints, I developed the “Nima
Stage 4- Design                                                              X Change” app, which is a personalized project management tool that
Now that the intervention scope and context parameters have been             helps community organizers formalize and aid in community initiatives
established through the Discover and Define stages, the Design stage         through barter-based exchange (Figure 10). By using the app, Abu
translates community aspirations and project scope into targeted             and other residents could facilitate waste clean-up sessions, collect
actions. The Design stage is an iterative and collaborative process          donated resources, manage and compensate Process Sanitation team
that consists of projective and constructive approaches that balance                                                                                      Figure 10.
collective visioning and project feasibility.                                                                                                             Nima X
                                                                                                                                                          Change app
Projective methods emphasize product ideation, which includes a                                                                                           process
diverse range of ethnographic tools like additional contextual inquiry,
interviews, and task analysis. Since Constructive methods are centered
around concept development, tools utilized in this approach include
charrettes, rapid prototyping, and usability testing.

When utilizing projective Design methods, I assisted Abu and other
members of Process Sanitation Team during routine waste pick-ups.
This first-hand experience of waste pick-up gave me invaluable insight
into the logistics needed to clean Ayawaso East, new relationships with
key partners and resources needed to upcycle and safely dispose of


386                                                                                                                                                               387
volunteers.                                                                  into quantifiable metrics serve as key performance indicators (KPIs) to
Both the urban design guide and app tool respond to specific findings        objectively assess the impact of the intervention (Figure 11). In order to
addressed in the Dawn, Discover, and Define stages of the anti-              ground impact measurements in evidence-based claims, establishing
exploitative design methodology. The tools designed can be used
complementary of each other to enable Ayawaso East’s first holistic and                                                                                   Figure 11:
                                                                                                                                                          Establishing
grassroots-operated infrastructure system.
                                                                                                                                                          KPI metrics

Stage 5- Deliver
Since all the designs were developed through extensive collaboration
between the designer and the community, establishing sustainable
ways to implement the interventions is inherent to the anti-exploitative
design approach. By identifying and integrating the capacities of key
stakeholders during the Dawn, Discover, and Design stages, the Deliver
stage communicates specific tasks and strategies with community
members who have committed to upholding the intervention. This
stage is crucial in transferring power from the designer so that the
community self-governs and evolve their initiatives without further
external intervention.

In order to devolve my participation, I organized group meetings
with all self-identified community project implementers, particularly
Process Sanitation Team and VOiCE CIC. During the meetings, I served
as a facilitator while Process Sanitation Team and VOiCE CIC’s team
discussed a collaborative strategy on how they would like to carry
out Ayawaso East’s community waste infrastructure plan. In addition
to facilitating implementation discussions and transferring my design
materials to key stakeholders, I also suggested future resources that        KPIs is paramount in claiming impact with confidence (Reynolds 2018).
community organizers could utilize to evolve their project. An example       As I closed the Design stage of my research in January 2019, I am
includes integrating Code Academy training, a free online coding             continuing aspects of the Deliver stage. I plan on conducting the
education platform, into VOiCE CIC’s existing youth education and            Determine stage 1-year after the Deliver stage has been completed.
capacity-building initiative. By training residents how to code, VOiCE
CIC will be able to continue its successful work on helping Ayawaso East     When measuring the impact of Ayawaso East project, there are several
learn valuable skills that may help reduce existing high unemployment        dimensions to assess: the anti-exploitative relationship between the
skills, and allowing residents to modify the app as it continues to change   designer and the community; and the catalytic nature of the process
post-implementation.                                                         and product of the intervention.

Stage 6- Determine                                                           The role between the designer and the community must be reflected
Even after the designer’s active participation has ceased, evaluating the    on from two perspectives. As a designer, I actively fostered an anti-
impact of the project helps the designer understand the usefulness,          exploitative relationship by consistently positioning myself as a support
usability, quality, and impact of their intervention. In the Determine       resource rather than a project leader. Also, all the tools that I co-
stage, the designer will evaluate the project’s progress after 6 months –    developed were an extension of existing community knowledge and
1 year after implementation.                                                 initiatives. From the community’s perspective, I helped expand their
                                                                             network of resources. By connecting them to relevant stakeholders
Trust from the community does not stop after a project is designed. By       and tools to help them implement and evolve their waste management
continuing dialogue to understand the community’s experience during          project, enables the community to continue to be self-sufficient without
and after the intervention process allows the designer to reflect on and     my direct assistance or any future help.
grow from their anti-exploitative practices. An impact measurement
plan is best when based on a theory of change. Breaking down the             Although the development of “A Cleaner Nima” guide and the
anti-exploitative design research principles and project objectives          “Nima X Change” app were pivotal technical resources to further the
                                                                             community’s endeavors, the most transformative aspect of the Ayawaso
388                                                                                                                                                                 389
East waste management collaboration was the design process. Since
the community has the autonomy to implement and evolve their waste            As scholar Ananya Roy states, “there is no such thing as ‘the voiceless’.
management system, the method and tools that the community uses               There are only the deliberately silenced, or the preferably unheard”.
today may not be the ones that they choose tomorrow. Regardless of            Ultimately, anti-exploitative design research has the power to dismantle
what tools they may choose to utilize, the experience of co-developing        unjust power systems by celebrating the voices of marginalized
a waste management strategy and connecting the community with                 communities, rather than speaking for them.
resources/training to implement their project is fundamental in
transferring knowledge, capacity, power to ensure resilience and self-
mobilization of the community, rather than perpetuating dependence
on the designer.

Conclusions
In a world abundant with resources, a person may be compelled to help
combat adversity and injustice. Problematic models of helping those
who are marginalized centers the interventionist as “the voice for the
voiceless”.

Design as an intervention has the power to shape systems and the lives
of people who engage within it. Therefore, the design process must
be refined in a way that increases accountability and context-sensitivity
of the impact of design interventions. Developing an anti-exploitative
design research methodology is key in enabling empathetic practices
and practitioners.

The story of Ayawaso East is a ubiquitous reality of systemic
marginalization, extractive interventions, and the power of grassroots
organizing for community resilience. By developing a hybridized anti-
exploitative design research model, I navigated the role of the designer
in facilitating a process and designing an intervention that authentically
disrupts power hierarchies. My design research experience in Ayawaso
East reveals the essentiality and interconnectedness of collaboration,
transparency, support, social capital, and local knowledge and
imagination as the means for promoting equity and autonomy in
marginalized communities.

Being inspired and directed by the community is a humbling and
transformative experience for both the designer and the community.
By building on local knowledge and positive existing assets in Ayawaso
East, the anti-exploitative paradigm of design research resulted in the co-
creation of the two distinct tools, as well as augmenting local residents
as the interventionists of their existence and the self-liberation from the
power imbalance of the designer and greater network of oppression.
However, reducing the designer’s power does not mean giving up the
fight against injustice. In fact, “when [a designer has] the privilege of
power and influence and can see that others are being denied their
rights, [designers] can continue to speak out against injustice. But even
in those circumstances, … [the] end goal should be to work and change
the environment that has imposed the silence” (Registre, 2017).


390                                                                                                                                                       391
References                                                                                  Reynolds, Gwendolyn, et al. “A Playbook for Designing Social Impact Measurement.”
                                                                                            , Stanford Social Innovation Review, 21 Dec. 2018, ssir.org/articles/entry/a_playbook_
                                                                                            for_designing_social_impact_measurement#.
Abdulla, Danah. “A Manifesto of Change or Design Imperialism? A Look at the Purpose
of the Social Design Practice.” A Matter of Design: Making Society trough Science           “VOiCE.” Millennium Cities Initiative Partners, Columbia University Earth Institute, mci.
and Technology, 5th STS Italia Conference, 2014, www. academia.edu/14145120                 ei.columbia.edu/
A_Manifesto_of_Change_or_Design_Imperialism_A_Look_at_the_Purpose_of_the_                   files/2014/08/VOiCE-brochure.pdf. Accessed 23 May 2018.
Social_Design_Practice.
                                                                                            Yaajalaal, Ahmed. Personal Interview. 26 March 2018.
Ametefe, Wise. Personal interview. 27 March 2018.
Annis Hammond, S. “The 5-step Appreciative Inquiry Process.” Partnerships in
Dementia Care, University of Waterloo,1998, uwaterloo.ca/partnerships-in-dementia-
care/getting-started-culture-change/5-step-appreciative-inquiry-process. Bushe, G.R.
(2013). Kessler, E. (ed.). The Appreciative Inquiry Model (PDF). The Encyclopedia of
Management Theory. Sage Publications.
Barnett, Michael. Empire of Humanity. Ithaca, Cornell University Press, 2011.
Columbia University Earth Institute’s Millennieum Cities Initiative. Geospatial data on
urban systems in Nima, Accra, Ghana. 2010. Raw data. Nima, Accra.
Damien, Hadassah. “Design as intervention: ethical methods.” Medium, 10 Apr. 2019,
uxdesign.cc/design-as-intervention-ethical-methods-34e8c9b0455d.
Fairchild, Gregory. “Residential Segregation Influences on the Likelihood of Ethnic Self-
Employment - Fairchild - 2009 - Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice - Wiley Online
Library.” Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, vol. 33, no. 2, 2009, pp. 373–95.
Freire, Paulo. Pedagogy of the Oppressed. The Seabury Press, 1970.
Hanington, Bruce M. “Generative Research in Design Education.” Hong Kong
Polytechnic University, International Association of Socities of Design Research, 12 Nov.
2007,    www.sd.polyu.edu.hk/iasdr/proceeding/papers/Generative%20Research%20
in%20Design%20Education.pdf
Harvey, Jenny. “Participatory Action Research as a Theory of Practice for Planners.”
CoLab Radio, MIT CoLab, Nov. 2016. Accessed 23 May 2018.
Issaka, Abubakari, Personal Interview. 11 February 2018.
Kang, Sanggyun, Jorge Ubaldo Colin Pescina, Philip Jayson Quashigah, and Innocent
Kumashie. “Nima Land Use
Mapping Project: Report and Map Set.” Millennium Cities Initiative, Columbia
University Earth Institute, Aug. 2010, mci.ei.columbia.edu/files/2013/03/Nima-Land-
Use-Mapping-Report-2010.pdf. Accessed 23 May 2018.
“Models of Participation.” 360 Participation Model, https://360participation.com/
models-of-participation/.
McDonnell, Tim. “What’s the World’s Fastest-Growing Economy? Ghana Contends
for the Crown.” New York Times, New York Times, 10 Mar. 2018, www.nytimes.
com/2018/03/10/world/africa/ghana-worlds-fastest-growing-economy.html.
Mingle, Jacob. Personal interview. 26 March 2018.
“Overview.” World Bank, 2019, www.worldbank.org/en/country/ghana/overview.
Pawelke, Andreas, and Michael Cañares. “From extraction to empowerment: a better
future for data for development.”, World Wide Web Foundation, 11 May 2018,
webfoundation.org/2018/05/from-extraction-to-empowerment-a-better-future-for-
data-for-development/.
Popova, Maria. “The Language of Design Imperialism.” Design Observer, 29 July 2010,
designobserver.com/feature/the-language-of-design-imperialism/14718.
Registre, Judithe. “Why We Should Avoid Becoming the Voice of the Voiceless.” ,
Inclusivus, 8 Mar. 2017, inclusivus.org/inpowered-perspectives/2017/3/8/why-we-
should-avoid-becoming-the-voice-of-the-voiceless.



392                                                                                                                                                                                     393
      Material reality to
      materiality: Ocean
      plastic and design
                research
            Katherina Vones and Ian Lambert
394                                      395
Abstract                                                                    edition” products successfully utilise remanufactured ocean plastic
With approximately 5 to 13 million tonnes of plastic waste being            as a composite material, these initiatives are often short-lived and
deposited into the marine environment every year (Jambeck et al.,           economically unsustainable in the longer term. Individual designers
2015), oceanic plastic pollution is approaching catastrophic levels. This   such as Studio Swine, through their projects Sea Chair (Swine, 2012)
figure is widely used across the news media, although Jambeck et al.        and Gyrecraft (Swine, 2015) have taken a more experimental approach,
also state that, “[…] no rigorous estimates exist of the total amount and   by focusing on the process of directly harvesting the raw material from
origin of plastic debris in the marine environment” (2015, p.768). As       the sea and then devising original in-situ manufacturing approaches to
large islands of plastic waste such as the Pacific Gyre (more commonly      create thought-provoking objects that draw attention to the underlying
known as the Pacific Garbage Patch) amass through the forces of             ecological issues.
intercontinental currents (Law et al., 2010) and microscopic plastic
particles enter the food chain, serious consequences on the delicate        There are multiple challenges. Retrieving marine plastic is immensely
ecosystems of marine life, and ultimately human health are becoming         difficult: much of the plastic (up to 60%) in the ocean consists of particles
more apparent (Wright et al., 2013). Remote beaches in the pathway          less than 1mm in size (Roberts, 2010). The National Geographic (Evers,
of oceanic currents, such as those on the West Coast of Scotland,           2014) estimates that up to 70% of the plastic forming the large gyres
become repositories for discarded ocean plastic (Barnes and Milner,         sinks to the ocean floor: “[…] The seafloor beneath the Great Pacific
2005), with only a small percentage of the total amount being usefully      Garbage Patch may also be an underwater trash heap.” Once retrieved,
repurposed by locals. The rest is left to photodegenerate, breaking into    the plastic needs to be cleaned of salt and micro-organisms that might
ever smaller parts and being washed back into the sea or ingested by        contaminate recycling, but even then, ocean plastic can be exposed
local wildlife (Seltenrich, 2015). Ocean plastic therefore represents a     to ultra violet light for many years and photo-degenerates. This, along
serious environmental threat as well as an underused material resource      with continuous contact with salt makes the ocean plastic extraordinarily
freely available to local populations.                                      plastic brittle. To enter it back into the recycling stream it requires to
                                                                            be mixed with other plastics retrieved through waste disposal on land
Introduction                                                                and a certain percentage of virgin plastics. In 2014, trade publication
In recent years, the problem of ocean plastic has received increasing       Packaging News announced that environmentally conscious detergent
attention from the media and as a consequence has gained wider public       brand Ecover had launched bottles made from ocean waste plastic but
recognition. In the UK, this increasingly applied after the broadcasting    then states that it “…is made entirely from recycled plastic, with 10%
of the episode ”Our Blue Planet” in 2017, which forms the final part of     collected from the sea.” (Corbin, 2014). This low percentage of ocean
the BBC’s popular Blue Planet II series (Honeyborne, 2017). Presenter       plastics is further elaborated upon by Ecover’s Philip Malmberg in an
Sir David Attenborough examined the effects of anthropogenic activity       earlier article published by newspaper The Guardian: “It will always
on the world’s oceans, and reported that plastics, along with rising        depend on the amount and quality of the plastic they [the fishermen]
temperatures, were the biggest concerns currently facing the marine         have managed to fish.” (Smithers, 2013). Online technology magazine
environment. An article featured in The Guardian newspaper previously       Wired reported that soap manufactuer Method had also used bottles
reported estimates of up to 12m tons per year (Gould, 2015). As far         made from a blend of 10% ocean plastic and 90% other recycled plastic
back as 2010, an episode of BBC Radio 4’s Costing the Earth (Roberts,       for their packaging in 2012 (Hurst, 2012), although an earlier report
2010) provided a detailed report on the above mentioned Pacific Gyre.       claimed this would be 25% (Guevarra, 2011). Method (Method, 2015)
This is a mass of plastics floating on or just below the surface that has   advised that firstly this was due to the short supply of ocean plastic – it
collected in the north Pacific Ocean, approximately twice the size of       is difficult and costly to collect in the reliable quantities needed at this
France (Callan, 2014), although estimates of its size vary. It is in fact   scale of manufacture – and also confirmed that ocean plastic was of a
one of five gyres (Cózar et al., 2014). Costing the Earth (Roberts, 2010)   lesser quality due to a combination of the photo-degeneration and salt
reported that plastic litter on beaches has doubled since 1994. Today,      (Method, 2015).
there are many groups around the world trying to address the problem,
with numerous attempts to retrieve plastic from the sea and coastlines,     Given the enormity of the problem, individual attempts may seem
to others at reducing single use plastics and the amount of plastic         futile, but as part of a combined global effort of activism stimulated by
entering the oceans in the first place. Environmental organisations such    design research in conjunction with targeted public engagement can
as Parley for the Oceans aim to foster public awareness and encourage       make an impact. We make no claim for this project to as a solution to
a more meaningful engagement with the ecological implications of            the problem – indeed, experiencing the extent of the ocean plastic
ocean plastic on a commercial level by engaging business partners           problem in remote places such as the Outer Hebrides first hand has
such as G-Star RAW, Adidas and Stella McCartney in collaborative            emphasised to this team of researchers that individuals can only have
projects (Parley for the Oceans, 2019). While the resulting “special        a relatively limited impact on the conversations that need to be had in

396                                                                                                                                                         397
order to generate a meaningful solution. It is a small gesture intended         providing pathways to feed research findings directly into secondary
to bring further understanding to the wider public.                             education and to specialist, informed, audiences.

Objectives of the research                                                      Location of the research
So far, the difficulties inherent in obtaining and working with ocean           Following an initial visit to the Isle of Harris in the outer Hebrides on
plastic have prevented a comprehensive engagement with this material            the West Coast of Scotland by one of the researchers in 2015, the Islet
in a larger context. The concept of ocean plastic as a viable material          of Scarp was identified by the research team as a location of interest
for design, manufacturing, remanufacturing and recycling has not been           to the project with a very high concentration of plastic waste being
explored to its fullest degree. Conventional methods of recycling,              washed up on the South-West facing beaches of the Islet, particularly
such as industrial remanufacturing or depolymerisation, are currently           the Mol Mor inlet (Figures 1 and 2). By consulting the oceanic current
unviable both economically and from an environmental point of view,             models developed by (Maximenko et al., 2012), (Lebreton et al., 2012)
mostly due to the cost of collecting and transporting ocean plastic to          and (Sherman and van Sebille, 2016), the team extrapolated that the
centralised industrial facilities and quality issues connected to foreign       likelihood of beaches with a West or South-Westerly orientation on the
particle contaminants having entered the plastic during its lifecycle.          West Side of the island to contain significant accumulations of Ocean
Ocean plastic therefore represents a serious environmental threat as well       Plastic was greater than of those with a Northern orientation, or those
as an underused material resource freely available to local populations.        on the East side that face the Scottish mainland. In this respect, the
Applying a systemic approach to this circular process allows locals to          research undertaken by (Neumann et al., 2014), while not directly
experiment with materials and processes and discover novel ways to              focusing on the beaches of Scotland, offers an excellent visualisation of
repair, repurpose and remake objects from ocean plastic, encouraging            the types of oceanic currents that may affect exposed areas situated in
skill sharing and community education. As 3D printing is gaining ground         the Northern hemisphere. The multitude of small inlets situated along
both in popularity as well as general availability, exploring strategies        the coastal landscape of the Isle of Harris, some of which culminate in
for remanufacturing ocean plastic into 3D printing filament suitable for        substantial sea lochs, provide a comb-like structure that traps marine
FDM printers was specified as an intended outcome of the project.               debris amongst the rocks of Harris’ dramatic coastline. Anecdotal
At the core of this research was fieldwork involving site visits to locations   evidence gathered during the two field trips from local populations
on the Isle of Harris, where nautical currents have turned local beaches        suggests that many of these marine debris deposits exist in remote
and secluded bays into large ocean plastic ‘repositories’, spread over a        and practically inaccessible locations of outstanding natural beauty.
period of six months. More specifically, the coastal areas on the West of       It is the peculiar irony of the Anthropocene that geographical areas
the Isle of Harris were targeted for their potential to attract large amounts   mostly untouched by human presence are amongst the worst affected
of ocean plastic predicted by marine surface modelling (Sherman and             by marine debris.
van Sebille, 2016). The site visits were conducted in August and March,
                                                                                                                                                            Figure 1.
enabling the observation of the effects harsh winter weather has on                                                                                         The Mol Mor
plastic distribution and accumulation in the chosen locations. The                                                                                          on the Islet
weather during our second trip in March was too inclement to consider                                                                                       of Scarp in
a repeat visit to the Islet of Scarp, but data from a previous site visit in                                                                                August 2018.
2015 nevertheless provided a basis for comparison.                                                                                                          Note that
                                                                                                                                                            from afar the
Each site visit involved scoping and documenting what ocean plastics                                                                                        beach looks
                                                                                                                                                            prisitne.
are available by collecting a range of samples from different locations,
including those that are only accessible by boat. Small samples of
those plastics identified as viable for remanufacturing were brought
back to the Edinburgh Napier University Polymer lab to be analysed
and evaluated for quality. This involved exploring how they could be
cleaned, pelletised, desiccated and subsequently remanufactured into
3D-printing filament for use in FDM 3D-printers.

At the end of the project, educational workshops held at two local high
schools and at the bi-annual Research Through Design Conference
served to share the material knowledge developed during this project,


398                                                                                                                                                                   399
                                                                              Figure 2. The     and included broken parts as well as whole objects. The team aimed to
                                                                              Mol Mor cov-      gather as wide a variety of plastics as possible. Despite the existence
                                                                              ered in ocean     of the polymer recycling code system, most plastics that have been
                                                                              plastic as seen
                                                                                                through the rugged environment of stormy seas and rock-strewn coast
                                                                              in 2015.
                                                                                                lines, were found not to contain such hints to their material origins, so
                                                                                                the team used their own judgement in selecting the samples. Another
                                                                                                criterion in selecting the samples was to pick those with an attractive
                                                                                                array of colours, as the intention to eventually turn them into 3D-printing
                                                                                                filament added the consideration of an aesthetic element. The use of
                                                                                                photography as a research method was employed extensively, both
                                                                                                in recording the location of Ocean Plastic samples, the environmental
                                                                                                issues that were witnessed and later as a tool for in depth analysis in
                                                                                                the laboratory.
                                                                                                                                                                              Figure 3.
                                                                                                                                                                              Katharina
                                                                                                                                                                              Vones & Ian
                                                                                                                                                                              Lambert on
                                                                                                                                                                              a remote
                                                                                                                                                                              beach at
Fieldwork and initial findings                                                                                                                                                Loch Tam-
After receiving funding from the Carnegie Trust for the Scottish                                                                                                              nabhaigh.
Universities in 2018, a team of researchers travelled to the Isle of Harris
in the last week of August 2018 for a seven day field trip (Figure 3).
Documentary filmmaker Dr Diane MacLean accompanied the team on
this field trip in order to facilitate interactions with local populations
known to her from previous visits to the area that formed part of her
extensive doctoral research on the oral histories of the Islet of Scarp
(MacLean, 2014). The following objectives were identified by the team
prior to commencing the fieldwork:

      • Revisiting the Mol Mor on the Islet of Scarp to investigate whether
      there had been significant change in the accumulation of Ocean
      Plastic debris since the first visit in 2015.
      • Surveying the area around Scarp for further significant                                 The Islet of Scarp is only accessible by boat, and the team’s first attempt
      accumulations of Ocean Plastic debris. This included gaining access                       to cross the short distance between the pier at Hushinish and the
      to more remote locations, particularly the sea lochs north of Scarp,                      landing on Scarp was foiled by an increasing swell of the sea. Scarp has
      by liaising with local farmers and fishermen.                                             not been permanently inhabited since the 1970s (MacLean, 2014), and
      • Surveying several beaches along the South West coast of the Isle                        the only human presence on the Islet is contained within a few cottages
      of Harris to assess whether Ocean Plastic Debris is present. Beaches                      on the site of the old village during the summer months. There are no
      that were targeted included those located around Hushinish,                               footpaths on Scarp, and the Mol Mor beach is only accessible by scaling
      Gobhaig, Borve and Rodel.                                                                 a steep hill and subsequently descending through marshland towards
      • Visiting the two secondary schools (Sir E. Scott School in Tarbert                      the rugged coastline. Even as high as halfway up this hill, evidence
      on the Isle of Harris, and Mallaig High school on the West Coast)                         of marine debris could be detected, possibly deposited there during
      that were previously identified as locations for conducting public                        the stormy winter months. If this debris is left undisturbed, it gradually
      engagement workshops.                                                                     degenerates, slowly sinking into the fabric of the boggy landscape. This
                                                                                                is a phenomenon we witnessed at multiple locations (Figures 4&5) and is
On visiting the targeted locations, the team decided to collect a                               one of the most insidious environmental issues to be tackled. Once the
representative selection of Ocean Plastic samples to analyse and                                plastic debris is thus embedded in the landscape, it becomes incredibly
experiment with in the Polymer Laboratory located at Edinburgh Napier                           difficult to remove and needs to be extracted manually, piece by piece.
University. The samples collected ranged in size between 2 and 40cm,                            Furthermore, as harsh environmental conditions deposit soil, stones or
                                                                                                sand on top of the embedded debris, strata of plastic waste are formed
400                                                                                                                                                                                    401
and become a fossilised element in the landscape. We witnessed such                             might take place, as the beach is not easily accessible even from the
stratification on the cove-like beach at the small hamlet of Gobhaig                            water and needs to be landed on with a dinghy. Despite a tentative
(Figure 6), where locals had reportedly been observing this process                             agreement having been formed between local pressure groups and
since the 1980s. These direct observations confirm the model of marine                          the fishing industry to undertake this arduous task, it depends entirely
plastic pathways proposed by (Critchell and Lambrechts, 2016), and                              on the goodwill of individual companies. We saw similar large bags
worryingly point to the eventual degradation of these stratified layers                         of collected ocean plastics in several other beach locations on the
into microplastics that finally enter the water table and food chain.                           Isle of Harris, but as of our last visit in March 2019 they had been
                                                                              Figure 4. A       untouched. Images of the beaches strewn with larger objects may
                                                                              crate that has    elicit a more sensational response from viewers, but these are in fact
                                                                              sunk into a       easier to collect. The bigger problem by far are the smaller fragments
                                                                              boggy marsh       embedded in the rotting seaweed, sand, earth and under rocks and
                                                                              and been          stones (Figure 9). These are more difficult to collect and are the types
                                                                              overgrown by      of items inadvertently eaten by sea creatures, through which they enter
                                                                              mossy algae.
                                                                                                the human food chain and also kill birds and mammals (Furness, 1985,
                                                                              This was seen
                                                                              on a beach
                                                                                                Moore, 2008). Collecting plastic washed up on beaches is one place
                                                                              only accessi-     to start; however, plastic debris that comes ashore can easily be taken
                                                                              ble by boat       back by the sea during the stormy winter season.
                                                                              near Loch                                                                                    Figure
                                                                              Tamnabhaigh                                                                                  6. Plastic
                                                                              in August                                                                                    stratification
                                                                              2018.                                                                                        on the beach
                                                                                                                                                                           at Gobhaigh,
                                                                                                                                                                           as seen in
                                                                                                                                                                           March 2019.



                                                                              Figure 5. A
                                                                              thick plastic
                                                                              rope that
                                                                              has been
                                                                              swallowed
                                                                              into the fabric
                                                                              of the soil on
                                                                              the Mol Mor,
                                                                              as seen in                                                                                   Figure 7. The
                                                                              August 2018.                                                                                 Mol Mor in
                                                                                                                                                                           August 2018,
                                                                                                                                                                           facing South.
                                                                                                                                                                           Note the
                                                                                                                                                                           large bags
                                                                                                                                                                           of gathered
                                                                                                                                                                           plastic wait-
                                                                                                                                                                           ing to be
                                                                                                                                                                           collected.


Reaching the Mol Mor beach itself was an eye-opening experience
for the team. The beach is completely covered in large quantities of
marine plastic debris as far as the eye can see. A recent drive by the
local community to gather the ocean plastic was still evidenced by large
white bags, filled to the brim with plastic objects and awaiting collection
(Figures 7 and 8). However, it is currently unclear when such a collection
402                                                                                                                                                                                  403
                                                                               Figure 9. Plas-   of someone with a scientific background in the context of collaborative
                                                                               tic fragments     design research is a cornerstone of the methodology proposed
                                                                               entangled in      by (Miodownik, 2003), and later expanded upon in the context of
                                                                               seaweed and
                                                                                                 contemporary craft (Vones, 2013, Vones, 2017), as it emphasises the
                                                                               driftwood on
                                                                               a beach near      interplay and amalgamation of fundamentally different perspectives
                                                                               Rodel, as seen    on the nature of materiality. In this case, the technical data gathered
                                                                               in August         during the initial analysis provided a basis for comparing variations in
                                                                               2018.             the remanufactured filament in terms of strength, printability and melt-
                                                                                                 flow. After initial discussions, it was also decided that following scientific
                                                                                                 protocol in recording the samples before remanufacturing them into 3D
                                                                                                 printing filament would be beneficial for later-stage analysis. Thus, each
                                                                                                 sample was photographed in a studio environment from above, using
                                                                                                 a ruler (cm) as an indicator of scale. A full frame 35mm DSLR (Canon
                                                                                                 5D MkII) was used in conjunction with two lenses: the Canon EF 50mm
                                                                                                 F2.5 Macro for small to medium sized samples, and the Canon EF 24-
                                                                                                 70mm F4 L IS for larger samples. Additionally, some samples were
                                                                                                 selected to be photographed using a high-magnification macro lens
                                                                                                 (Canon MP-E Macro 65mm F2.8), which enabled images of the surface
Visiting a location like the Mol Mor really emphasises the scale and                             textures of the plastic to be taken at a magnification factor of between
materiality of the global ocean plastic problem. The objects we saw                              x3-x5. Each sample examined in this way was photographed using the
included those from a domestic environment (bathroom fixtures, shoes,                            focus stacking method, to produce an image that provides maximum
brushes, broomheads, plastic bottles and bags), as well as those clearly                         magnification and depth of field. The resulting close visual examination
related to the maritime industries (including fish farms) and nautical                           of the surface qualities of ocean plastic gives a fascinating insight into
activities (crates, wellingtons, buoys, packaging materials, parts of                            the material and biological realities encountered in the field. In addition
fishing implements, different kinds of rope) (Figure10). The latter                              to the expected discolouration and scratch marks left by environmental
category forms the majority of the waste we discovered on the beaches                            conditions, the surface of some of the PP samples examined appears
of the Isle of Harris, and suggests that a more holistic approach including                      to disintegrate into small scales, that trap dirt beneath them and in
close involvement of global maritime and nautical industries and central                         time crumble away from the surface to become insidious microplastic
government is required to even begin addressing the problem of ocean                             particles (Biber, 2016) (Figures 10 and11). The HDPE samples on the
plastic. Some of the plastic objects found intact on these beaches,                              other hand seemed to attract increasing colonisation with marine
such as PVC pipes, undamaged fishing nets, tubs, crates, buckets and                             organisms, which could point to consequences for the wider ecology
lengths of rope may be reclaimed by local populations to reuse, but                              in terms of species migration (Barnes and Milner, 2005) (Figures 12 and
the majority of the plastics we saw was in fragments. One local resident                         13). This is an area of great interest and warrants further investigation.
explained that the variety of objects coming ashore on one beach had
in fact declined since the mid-1990s. This coincided, she believed, with                         In terms of processing the ocean plastic samples for remanufacturing,
the time that New York had stopped dumping its rubbish in the sea                                the observed surface qualities had a similar impact, namely that of
(MacLean and Lambert, 2015). Nevertheless, there was still a vast array                          making the cleaning process and removal of foreign matter increasingly
of objects and many different types of plastic were initially identified:                        difficult. Despite concerted efforts by the research assistant to remove as
PVC, PP, HDPE, LDPE, PET, PS, nylon, rubber, acrylic. Subsequent,                                many contaminants as possible, some remained and were inadvertently
more detailed, analysis in the laboratory confirmed these findings, but                          included as small particles within the finished Ocean Plastic Filament.
suggested that the plastics most plentiful in the visited locations were                         It is important to note that the finished filament also retained a strong
in fact HDPE, PP, Nylon and PS.                                                                  aroma of the sea, despite having been through a high-temperature
                                                                                                 extrusion process. This points to the inclusion of contaminants at
Material reality to materiality                                                                  a molecular level, which would be impossible to remove without
Following our initial site visits, the plastic samples the team had gathered                     further elaborate processing. However, during the public engagement
were taken to the Edinburgh Napier Polymer Laboratory and analysed                               activities that were conducted by the team, this smell was generally
in detail by a research assistant with a materials science background,                           received positively and served as a reminder of the historical origins of
using an infrared spectrometer and differential scanning calorimeter to                          the material. After vigorous cleaning, the samples were granulated and
measure melt flow index and thermal behaviours. Utilising the expertise                          mixed by weight with virgin PLA to different ratios between 50-60% of
                                                                                                 ocean plastic (HDPE and PP). PLA was chosen as a carrier material as it
404                                                                                                                                                                               405
      Figure 10.                                                                                     Figure 13.
      A brush-                                                                                       The same ob-
      like object                                                                                    ject as Figure
      made from                                                                                      12 photo-
      PP. The dirt                                                                                   graphed
      accumulat-                                                                                     under a
      ing between                                                                                    magnification
      the bristles                                                                                   of x3. Note
      is particu-                                                                                    the visible
      larly hard to                                                                                  colonisation
      remove, and                                                                                    with algae,
      some marine                                                                                    that serve to
      colonisation                                                                                   adhere sand
      can also be                                                                                    particles to
      observed.                                                                                      the object
                                                                                                     and have
                                                                                                     completely
                                                                                                     enveloped
                                                                                                     the sur face.

      Figure 11. The    is a bioplastic and can be composted in industrial facilities (Ebnesajjad,
      same object       2013), thus increasing the end-of-life options of the new material.
      as Figure 10      The extrusion process was undertaken with an industrial single-screw
      photographed
                        extruder, culminating in a water band cooling track and filament winder.
      under a mag-
      nification of     The process was subsequently also trialled with a small ‘enthusiast’-
      x3. Note the      level single-screw extruder (Noztek) and filament winder (V1.0), with
      scaly surface     promising results. This type of equipment might be reasonably found in
      disinte grating   a well-equipped local maker space, and open-source initiatives such as
      over time,        Precious Plastic even supply plans to build shredders and extruders to
      shedding          adventurous makers (Precious Plastic, 2019). The diameter chosen for
      mircoplastic      the filament was 1.75mm, as it is easier to extrude within tight tolerance
      particles.
                        than the other commonly used type at 2.85mm. Over the course of four
                        sessions, seven rolls of filament were produced from approximately ten
                        of the samples.

                        Workshops
      Figure 12. An
                        Three short workshops were undertaken, two with year 9 and year 10
      HDPE sample,
      displaying        schoolchildren in group-sizes of around 8 to 10 participants (Sir E. Scott
      severe photo-     School in Tarbert on the Isle of Harris, and Mallaig High school on the
      degener-          West Coast), and one as part of a research workshop at an academic
      ation and         conference. The two workshops with schools, both in remote locations
      heavily           situated on an affected coastline, served to introduce the children to the
      contaminated      idea that the ocean plastic coming ashore locally had potential value as
      with sand.        a material that can be reprocessed for making new things. Using an
                        enthusiast-level single screw extruder, they were shown how granulated
                        ocean plastic (PP), when mixed 50:50 with PLA, can be extruded into
                        3D printing filament, and then used to print a small scale 3D map of the
                        area where they lived (Figure 14). The children also had the opportunity
                        to play with 3D printing pens to help understand the principles of the
                        process. Each workshop was followed by a public lecture in the evening,
                        attracting surprisingly healthy numbers of local residents despite

406                                                                                                            407
inclement weather. The Q&A at the end on both evenings gave rise to                          extrusions using granulated blue polypropylene and white PLA. The
lively discussions that revealed useful local knowledge and insight into                     filament emerged with variations in the weighting of colour (Figures
the problem, with many using personal evidence to point the finger at                        15&16), probably because of the larger diameter (2.85mm) that was
marine industries and particularly fish farms.                                                                                                                             Figure 17.
                                                                                                                                                                           Workshop
The third workshop took place at the 2019 Research Through Design                                                                                                          outcomes
conference at the Delft University of Technology (TU Delft), having                                                                                                        as they were
been accepted in a competitive peer-reviewed call for pre-conference                                                                                                       displayed at
research workshop proposals. With six participants, including research                                                                                                     the RTD 2019
students and experienced academics, we were able to make use of                                                                                                            showcase.
TU Delft’s Makerspace to granulate polypropylene rope, and form
                                                                           Figure 14. Pu-
                                                                           pils at Mallaig
                                                                           High School
                                                                           experiment
                                                                           with filament
                                                                           extrusion and
                                                                           3D printing
                                                                           technologies.
                                                                                             required for the University’s 3D printers.

                                                                                             As a group, it was decided to design and print simple rings. The
                                                                                             reason for this was, firstly, that these were small and easy objects to
                                                                                             design and print, and second, as jewellery they symbolised the value
                                                                                             of returning a difficult to retrieve material into the commodity chain.
                                                                                             The resulting rings emerged in a semi-translucent colour that had an
                                                                                             uncanny resemblance to aquamarine blue, and these were gifted to
                                                                                             any delegates throughout the conference. Some of the designs the
                                                                                             participants created had symbols of the sea on them (waves, swirls)
                                                                                             while other, such as the “26.8kg ring”, embedded a more conceptual
                                                                           Figures 15 and    narrative based on the amount of plastic each person in the world
                                                                           16. Workshop      (7.6bn at the time of the workshop) would have to collect in order to
                                                                           participants      retrieve all of the plastic estimated to have entered the ocean in the last
                                                                           at RTD 2019       25 years (Figure17). The key learning outcomes of the workshops came
                                                                           granulate         from the physical demonstration of the transformation of materials, the
                                                                           ocean plastic     tactility of the resultant objects, as well as the discussion and creative
                                                                           and extrude
                                                                                             enquiry throughout. For example, to know that approximately half of the
                                                                           filament. Note
                                                                           the inconsist-
                                                                                             material in the rings, printed there and then, had just a few days before
                                                                           ent quality of    been plastic debris on a beach added a new dimension of appreciation,
                                                                           the filament      which resonated strongly with sustainable design narratives.
                                                                           due to elevat-
                                                                           ed moisture       Conclusions
                                                                           levels within     The problem of ocean plastic is enormous. It has to be addressed
                                                                           the ocean
                                                                                             through combined activism and the passing of strict international laws.
                                                                           plastic.
                                                                                             Plastic is a very useful material, but the approaching Anthropocene
                                                                                             Epoch needs to see a dramatic reduction in its feckless use and reserve it
                                                                                             for essential applications. The project has given rise to new insights into
                                                                                             the potential and challenges of working with ocean plastic as a material
                                                                                             for practice-led design. We have shifted from a position of optimism

408                                                                                                                                                                                 409
following early encounters with large amounts of seemingly useable             References
material, to a degree of pessimism as the growing impossibility for
humankind and nature to address this challenge unfolds. Furthermore,           Barnes, D. K. A. & Milner P. 2005. Drifting Plastic and its Consequences for Sessile
the process we are exploring is currently limited by the need to mix           Organism Dispersal in the Atlantic Ocean. Marine Biology, 146, 815-825.
different plastic types (i.e. PP and PLA). Mixing of materials is taking one   Behsta, J. 2013. Synthetic and natural polymers recycled to make matter with new
step backwards to take two steps forward.                                      functionality and aesthetics. Doctor of Philosophy, The Royal College of Art.
                                                                               Biber, N. F. A. 2016. Plastic Fragmentation in the Environment. Doctor of Philosophy,
We also acknowledge that 3D printing does not currently afford                 Plymouth University.
opportunities to utilise large amounts of the material. When considering       Callan, T. 2014. The surfing companies making waves with sustainable design [Online].
economies of scale in terms of the amounts of plastics used by a single        The Guardian. Available: http://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2014/
                                                                               nov/27/surfing-companies-making-waves-with-sustainable-design [Accessed 5th of
process, our efforts could be more effectively deployed in exploring           May 2019].
other manufacturing technologies such as DIY off-grid injection
                                                                               Cozr, A., Echevarria, F., Gonzalez-Gordillo, J. I., Irigoien, X., Úbedaa, B., Hernandez-
moulding (Lambert, 2017).                                                      Leond, S., Palma, Á. T., Navarro, S., Garcia-De-Lomas, J., Ruiz, A., Fernandez-De-
                                                                               Puelles, M. L. and Duarte, C. M. 2014. Plastic Debris in the Open Ocean. PNAS, 111,
However, while our contribution as design researchers and makers is a          10239-10244.
miniscule dent in the problem, but nevertheless allowed us to engage           Critchell, K. and Lambrechts, J. 2016. Modelling accumulation of marine plastics in the
with local communities and fellow researchers to discuss the problem,          coastal zone; what are the dominant physical processes? Estuarine, Coastal and Shelf
share knowledge and demonstrate the potential of ocean plastic as a            Science, 171, 111-122.
viable material for remanufacturing. This contribution should not be           Ebnesajjad, S. (ed.) 2013. Handbook of Biopolymers and Biodegradable Plastics -
underestimated in terms of reframing the narratives surrounding waste          Properties, Processing and Applications, Oxford: Elsevier Inc.
materials and developing novel strategies for stimulating wider, more          Evers, J. 2014. Great Pacific Garbage Patch [Online]. National Geographic Society.
meaningful, public debate. As a growing number of design researchers           Available:      http://education.nationalgeographic.com/encyclopedia/great-pacific-
                                                                               garbage-patch/ [Accessed 5th of May 2019].
focus their efforts in this area, the diversity of public engagement
approaches multiplies accordingly. Speaking about her own research             Furness, R. W. 1985. Ingestion of Plastic Particles by Seabirds at Gough Island, South
                                                                               Atlantic Ocean. Environmental Pollution Series A, Ecological and Biological, 38, 261-
of tasking care home residents with remaking plastic and textiles waste        272.
into objects of personal significance, Julie Behseta rightly concludes
                                                                               Gould, H. 2015. Could a circular economy save world’s oceans from plastic waste?
that:                                                                          [Online]. The Guardian. Available: http://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-
    “...the ethics and aesthetics of sustainability must include               business/2015/jun/08/could-a-circular-economy-save-worlds-oceans-from-plastic-
    recycling as a symbolic and poetic statement about the re-                 waste-live-chat [Accessed 5th of May 2019].
    evaluation of the role of empathy and relationality. […] The               Guevarra, L. 2011. Method Debuts New Wave Bottle Made from Plastic Ocean Trash.
    aesthetics of the process of use and reuse are celebrated here             [Online]. GreenBiz. Available: http://www.greenbiz.com/blog/2011/09/15/method-
                                                                               makes-new-recycled-plastic-bottle-garbage-sea [Accessed 5th of May 2019].
    as a means to enable us to reconsider the meaning of ‘care’.
    This is no longer a matter of sentimentality […] but is now an             Our Blue Planet, 2017. Directed by Honeyborne, J. British Broadcasting Company:
    essential and integral element of a global and industrial agenda           BBC 2.
    for sustainable manufacture.” (Behseta, 2013) p.144                        Hurst, N. 2012. Turning the ‘Ocean Garbage Patch’ Into Packaging [Online]. Wired.
                                                                               Available:   http://www.wired.com/2012/07/method-soap-bottle-from-ocean-plastic/
Our changing relationship with the natural environment, in light of current    [Accessed 5th of May 2019].
material realities, necessitates assuming increasing ethical and personal      Jambeck, J. R., Geyer, R., Wilcox, C., Siegler, T. R., Perryman, M., Andrady, A., Narayn,
responsibilities as both design researchers and human beings who care          R. and Law, K. L. 2015. Plastic Waste Inputs from Land into the Ocean. Science, 347,
                                                                               768-771.
for this planet in crisis. To promote an ethos of custodianship within
affected communities through exploring how the altered materiality             Lambert, I. 2017. The Isle of Harris Fish Slice. Making Futures. University of Plymouth.
of remanufactured ocean plastic can be used to communicate wider               Law, K. L., Moret-Ferguson, S., Maximenko, N. A., Proskurowksi, G., Peacock, E. E.,
environmental issues has been the focal point of this research project.        Hafner, J. and Reddy C. M. 2010. Plastic Accumulation in the North Atlantic Subtropical
                                                                               Gyre. Science, 329, 1185-1188.
                                                                               Lebreton, L. C. M., Greer, S. D. and Borrero, J. C. 2012. Numerical modelling of floating
                                                                               debris in the world’s oceans. Marine Pollution Bulletin, 64, 653-661.
                                                                               Maclean, D. 2014. Position, commission and production: a self-reflexive investigation
                                                                               into the generation of ethnographic knowledge through documentary production for
                                                                               BBC Alba. Edinburgh Napier University.



410                                                                                                                                                                        411
Maclean, D. I. & Lambert, I. A. Q. 2015. Interview with: Cuddugan, David, and
Cuddugan, Lesley. Scarp.
Maximenko, N., Hafner, J. and Niiler, P. 2012. Pathways of marine debris derived from
trajectories of Lagrangian drifters. Marine Pollution Bulletin, 65, 51-62.
Method. 5th & 6th of August 2015. RE: Ocean Plastic Packaging. Type to Lambert, I.
Miodownik, M. 2003. The Case for Teaching the Arts. Materials Today, 6 (12), 36-42.
Moore, C. J. 2008. Synthetic Polymers in the Marine Environment: A Rapidly Increasing,
long-term Threat. Environmental Research, 108, 131-139.
Neumann, D., CALLIES, U. and Matthies, M. 2014. Marine litter ensemble transport
simulations in the southern North Sea. Marine Pollution Bulletin, 86, 219-228.
Parley for the Oceans. 2019. Homepage - Facing Plastic Pollution [Online]. Available:
https://www.parley.tv/oceanplastic#parley-air-strategy-1 [Accessed 5th of May 2019].
Precious Plastic. 2019. Available: https://preciousplastic.com/ [Accessed 5th of May
2019].
Roberts, A. 2010. Costing the Earth: Plastic Pollution. 09/10/2010, 6pm ed. BBC Radio
4: British Broadcasting Company.
Sherman, P. and Van Sebille, E. 2016. Modeling marine surface microplastic transport to
assess optimal removal locations. Environmental Research Letters, 11, 014006.
Smithers, R. 2013. Ecover to turn sea plastic into bottles in pioneering recycling scheme
[Online]. The Guardian. Available: http://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/
mar/07/ecover-sea-plastic-bottles-recycling [Accessed 5th of May 2019].
Swine, S. 2012. Sea Chair [Online]. Available: https://www.studioswine.com/work/sea-
chair/ [Accessed 5th of May 2019].
Swine, S. 2015. Gyrecraft [Online]. Available: https://www.studioswine.com/work/
gyrecraft/ [Accessed 5th of May 2019].
Vones, K. Technological Microcosms – Considering Materiality and Collaborative
Practice in the Creation of Wearable Futures. Praxis and Poetics - Research Through
Design Conference, 2013 Northumbria University Newcastle. Northumbria University,
59 - 62.
Vones, K. 2017. Towards the Uncanny Object: Creating Interactive Craft with Smart
Materials. Doctor of Philosophy, Duncan of Jordanstone College of Art, University of
Dundee.
Wright, S. L., Thompson, R. C. and Galloway, T. S. 2013. The physical impacts of
microplastics on marine organisms: A review. Environmental Pollution, 178, 483-492.




412                                                                                         413
                                                                                (Reading University), Professor Teal Triggs (Royal College of Art), and
                                                                                Professor Tracy Bhamra (Loughborough University). I wish to record my
                                                                                thanks for their relentless energy and commitment to Design research
                                                                                in all its guises.

                                                                                A special mention is due to all of the reviewers who gave up their
                                                                                precious time, often at very short notice, and completed their reviews
                                                                                effectively and efficiently. The reviewers were involved in reviewing
                                                                                over 60 papers that were submitted to the Design Research for Change
                                                                                Symposium call-for-papers. Massive thanks goes to Professor Rachel
                                                                                Cooper (Imagination, Lancaster University), Dr Giovanni Innella (School
                                                                                of the Art Institute of Chicago), Professor Lorraine Gammon (Central St.


 Acknowledgements
                                                                                Martins, UAL), Professor Paul Chamberlain (Sheffield Hallam University),
                                                                                Sevra Davis (Design Museum, London), Sian Whyte (Design Council),
                                                                                Professor Sue Walker (Reading University), Professor Teal Triggs (Royal
                                                                                College of Art), Professor Tracy Bhamra (Loughborough University),
                                                                                Dr David Hands (Imagination, Lancaster University), Professor James
Producing a book like this one is never an individual activity – it is always   Moultrie (Cambridge University), Professor Paul Coulton (Imagination,
a collaboration between many people. This book is no different and I            Lancaster University), Dr Emma Dewberry (The Open University), Dr
have had the privilege of working with some amazing individuals on              Roger Whitham (Imagination, Lancaster University), Professor Andrew
the design and development of Design Research for Change and the                Walters (Cardiff Metropolitan University), Dr Alison Prendiville (London
associated symposium at the Design Museum, London on 11 and 12                  College of Communication, UAL), Professor Tom Inns (cofink Ltd.),
December 2019. The design and production of the book that you hold              Professor Leon Cruickshank (Imagination, Lancaster University), Dr Helen
in your hands just now has been completed by Euan Winton, a PhD                 Charman (V&A Museum, London), Professor Stuart Walker (Imagination,
student at Imagination, Lancaster University. I am sure you will agree          Lancaster University), Professor Jo-Anne Bichard (Helen Hamlyn Centre
Euan has done a great job.                                                      for Design, Royal College of Art), Professor Craig Bremner (Charles
                                                                                Sturt University), Professor Dan Lockton (Carnegie Mellon University),
I would also like to gratefully acknowledge the invaluable support              Dr Jonathan Ventura (Hadassah Academic College), Professor Ann
I have received on the design and development of the Design                     Light (University of Sussex), Dr Chris McGinley (Helen Hamlyn Centre
Research for Change symposium and book from my amazing AHRC                     for Design, Royal College of Art), Professor Mark Roxburgh (University
Design Leadership Fellow team – Pam Allen (Fellowship Coordinator),             of Newcastle, Australia), and Professor Peter Lloyd Jones (Imagination,
Francesco Mazzarella (Research Associate) and Loura Conerney                    Lancaster University).
(Communications Officer). My special thanks go to Harry Kerr (Strategy
and Development Manager for Digital and Design, AHRC) and Professor             I would also like to thank all of my fantastic colleagues at Imagination,
Edward Harcourt (AHRC Director of Research, Strategy and Innovation)            Lancaster University, as well as all the authors in this book with whom
for their continuing support and fantastic enthusiasm on the Design             we have collaborated over the last few months. Finally, I would like to
Leadership Fellowship over the last three years.                                extend my thanks also to all of the people I have forgotten to mention.

I have also had the pleasure of working with some of the leading                Professor Paul A. Rodgers
design researchers in the UK who have supported me over the course              AHRC Design Leadership Fellow
of the three year AHRC Design Leadership Fellowship in their capacity           Imagination, Lancaster University
as an Advisory Group member, namely - Professor Tom Inns (cofink
Ltd.), Dr Alison Prendiville (London College of Communication, UAL),
Professor Andrew Walters (Cardiff Metropolitan University), Dr Emma
Dewberry (The Open University), Professor James Moultrie (Cambridge
University), Professor Lorraine Gamman (Central St. Martins, UAL),
Professor Martyn Evans (Manchester Metropolitan University), Professor
Paul Chamberlain (Sheffield Hallam University), Sevra Davis (Design
Museum, London), Sian Whyte (Design Council), Professor Sue Walker

414                                                                                                                                                         415
      The twenty-one papers in this Design Research for
      Change (DR4C) book examine and explore how
      contemporary forms of design research are increasingly
      involved in a range of major social, cultural, economic,
      and environmental challenges. The research included
      in this book highlights a variety of significant roles that
      design researchers play in some of the most complex
      and demanding issues we face, such as energy and the
      environment, education, public services, health and social
      care both in the UK and globally.
      This rich set of papers are the end result of a lengthy
      process that began with an amazing response to the call-
      for-papers for the Design Research for Change (DR4C)
      symposium. We received 62 papers from researchers
      based in countries all over the world including Australia,
      USA, India, China, Sweden, Germany, Italy, Norway,
      Denmark, Israel, Greece, Turkey and the UK. After a
      thorough review process, twenty-one papers were
      accepted for this book and presentation in a single-
      track session over the course of two days at the Design
      Museum, London on Wednesday 11 and Thursday 12
      December 2019.




416
