Designing Experiences
                                  Columbia University Press
                                     Publishers Since 1893
                              New York Chichester, West Sussex
                                      cup.columbia.edu
                          Copyright © 2019 Columbia University Press
                                      All rights reserved
                                  E-ISBN 978-0-23154-951-6

                          Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
     Names: Rossman, J. Robert (James Robert), 1946- author. | Duerden, Mathew D., author.
               Title: Designing experiences / J. Robert Rossman, Mathew D. Duerden.
Description: New York: Columbia University Press, [2019] | Includes bibliographical references and
                                                index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2019004424 (print) | LCCN 2018061290 (e-book) | ISBN 9780231191685 (cloth: alk.
                                paper) | ISBN 9780231549516 (e-book)
    Subjects: LCSH: Customer relations. | Customer services. | Experience. | Target marketing.
  Classification: LCC HF5415.5 .R675 2019 (e-book) | LCC HF5415.5 (print) | DDC 658.5/038—dc23
                       LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2019004424

                             A Columbia University Press E-book.
      CUP would be pleased to hear about your reading experience with this e-book at cup-
                                    ebook@columbia.edu.

                                    Cover design: Noah Arlow
             Contents


                 Foreword

       Preface: Thanks for Joining Us!

                PART ONE
         Understanding Experience

                 CHAPTER ONE
Exploring Experiences and Experience Design

                CHAPTER TWO
      What Makes a Great Experience?

                CHAPTER THREE
     A Framework of Experience Types

                PART TWO
     The Experience Designer’s Toolkit

                CHAPTER FOUR
           The Experiencescape
                              CHAPTER FIVE
                     Experience Design Thinking

                              CHAPTER SIX
                  Designing the Experience Journey

                             CHAPTER SEVEN
                     Touchpoints and Transitions

                             PART THREE
       Creating Great Experiences: Enhancements and Examples

                             CHAPTER EIGHT
        The Stories We Tell: Building Drama in Your Experiences

                             CHAPTER NINE
                Techniques for Enhancing Experiences

                              CHAPTER TEN
Using Experience Design in Product Development and Corporate Strategy

                     Conclusion: Closing Thoughts

                                Notes

                                Index
                           Foreword

                            B. JOSEPH PINE II



I FIRST MET Mat Duerden in 2017 at the annual thinkAbout event that my
partner Jim Gilmore and I had staged every year for the past twenty years.
A couple of Brigham Young University colleagues had come the previous
year, and one of them joined Mat at this, our final event in Cleveland. It
was from Mat that we heard the news: thanks to their collective and
concerted efforts, BYU had changed the name of their program from the
“Department of Recreation Management” to the “Department of
Experience Design and Management”! It is the first university in the
United States I know of to fully recognize the importance of experience
design and management.
   And this book, by Mat and his colleague Bob Rossman, is the first I
know of that is fully focused on putting forth a set of experience design
ideas, principles, and frameworks that will, should you follow them, yield
an intentionally designed and engagingly staged experience.
   Now, truth be told, I am still looking forward to meeting the lead
author, but based on what you will read here, I know Bob understands
experience design. Interestingly, in the very first chapter where Bob and
Mat discuss applying user experience design, customer experience design,
and service experience design, I half-expected them to direct the reader to
apply experience experience design, for that should be the focus: the
design of the actual experience that people have. For as my partner Jim
and I endeavored to make clear in our book The Experience Economy,
experiences are a distinct economic offering, as distinct from services as
services are from goods. Experiences use goods as props and services as
the stage to engage each individual in an inherently personal way and
thereby create a memory, the hallmark of the experience.
   In guiding experience designers to make that a reality Bob and Mat
focus on three factors I consider paramount in the field: being intentional,
orchestrating elements, and designing time.
   The authors introduce the concept of intentionality right up front.
People have many experiences throughout life that are unplanned, and
companies offer many experiences that are haphazardly designed or even
totally unplanned. But to have any success in today’s experience economy,
you must be very intentional about what it is you are staging, about what
you want your guests—the customers of experiences—to undergo in order
to engage them and create that memory.
   Here the authors usefully apply the notions of micro- and
macroexperiences, where the intentional design of the microexperiences
—the deliberate sequencing of engaging elements—add up to the
macroexperience encompassing the phases of anticipation (before),
participation (during), and reflection (after). In The Experience Economy we
discuss this intentionality at its highest level under the concept of an
experience theme—the organizing principle of the experience that lets
you, as the designer, determine what is in the experience and what is out
in order to stage a cohesive experience, one that hangs together across all
the microexperiences to form, define, and sequence that
macroexperience. (And as an aside, you’ve got to love a book that
introduces as the masters of intentionality the proprietors of Buc-ee’s
restroom experiences! But you have to be in Texas to truly appreciate
them.)
   You can see this focus on intentionality right in Mat and Bob’s
definition of experience design: “the process of intentionally orchestrating
experience elements to provide opportunities for participants to co-create
and sustain interactions that lead to results desired by the participant and
the designer.” And right there, too, you see the second key factor
mentioned earlier: orchestrating. Although Jim Gilmore and I tend to use
the term stage, we have always understood that orchestrate and even
choreograph fit as well, for they each describe how that intentionality
results itself in the design of every aspect of the experience, from the
environment to the positive cues arrayed in that environment (as well as
the negative cues absent, sometimes conspicuously so), to what workers
do to enable each guest to fully engage in each experience and create that
memory—all of which Bob and Mat collectively and helpfully dub the
experiencescape.
   The third factor is the one I fully appreciated only years after our book
was published in 1999—namely, that experience design is fundamentally
the design of time. Each microexperience takes up its own particular
amount of time; orchestrating the length and sequence of the
microexperiences builds them up over time, drawing guests through a
timeline that finally yields the macroexperience; and doing all this
intentionally generates the drama you want to create—and be—in the
world.
   In fact, I love that in chapter 8 the authors discuss dramatic structure
and introduce the Freytag diagram, something we, too, added to the
updated edition of The Experience Economy in 2011. For the Freytag diagram
—the brainchild of nineteenth-century German performance theorist
Gustav Freytag—is something theater students learn to this day to
understand and embrace drama. This framework leads you in designing
time, to put together that sequence of events, one on top of the other, that
rise in action, build up to the climax, and then come back down again as
the experience draws to a close. Without drama, the sequence falls flat,
without much of anything going on. Ah, but with drama, your
intentionally designed experience fully engages each guest to leave the
residue of memory within them. Drama is time well designed.
   That right there, by the way, is why I’ve also grown to despise the term
customer experience. For as used by most everybody, it means to make
interactions with customers nice, easy, and convenient. True, distinctive
experiences, however, must be memorable, personal, and revealed over a
duration of time—in other words, must have drama.
   Being convenient is the antithesis of an experience as a distinct
economic offering, for it results in spending less time with customers,
rather than getting customers to value the time they spend with you, and
want to spend more of it. Nice, easy, and convenient are service
characteristics, not experience characteristics. They are all well and good
when what you want to do is deliver a service, one that provides
customers with time well saved. But experiences are about offering time
well spent, and to do that you must intentionally orchestrate
microexperiences across the breadth of time guests spend with you—
design the drama of time—to yield that macroexperience of an engaging
experience.
   To do that well, I urge you to follow the prescriptions of Bob and Mat
here in Designing Experiences. You will reap the rewards in your experience
offerings, in your business, and in your life.

  B. Joseph Pine II
  Dellwood, Minnesota
  Co-founder, Strategic Horizons LLP
   Author, The Experience Economy, Authenticity, Mass Customization, and
Infinite Possibility: Creating Customer Value on the Digital Frontier
                               Preface

                           Thanks for Joining Us!



OVER THE LAST twenty years a lot has been written about the importance
of experiences for individuals and organizations. Think about how and
why experiences matter to you personally. You most likely attempt to fill
your life with positive experiences. You also probably seek out companies
that in addition to providing you with goods and services also deliver
great experiences. While living in Texas, Mat would drive an extra few
miles to shop at his favorite grocery store, H-E-B, even though there were
other grocery stores closer to his home. He gladly did so because of the
superior experience H-E-B delivered.
   In an economy increasingly driven by the quality of experiences
provided, organizations that deliver great experiences to customers and
employees thrive and those that don’t become obsolete. Good experiences
attract and retain loyal customers and employees, whereas bad
experiences either drive them away or fail to motivate repeat business. A
widely adopted business truth can, in fact, be seen in the prevalent use of
the word “experience” by a wide range of companies, from Adobe’s tagline
“Make experience your business” to Delta’s promotion of “the Delta
experience,” everyone’s talking about experience. What we found
surprising is that although “experience” is getting a lot of air time, there’s
very little guidance available on how to systematically design experiences.
   We believe there is a need for a book that clearly lays out a process to
design experiences from beginning to end. It is not enough to bear
witness to the profitability of experiences or their wonderful
contributions to individuals and society, to work in this field you need to
be able to design them. The book you’re holding, Designing Experiences,
represents our effort to fill this gap.


                 Why We’re Interested in Experiences

Your authors, Bob and Mat, have been engaged in designing and
delivering leisure and educational experiences for more than forty years
combined. We both have a PhD in leisure studies and have worked as face-
to-face leaders, supervisors, and managers of organizations whose goal
was to deliver leisure experiences. Leisure is the gold standard of
experience design because leisure experiences are freely chosen and
intrinsically motivated. When designing great leisure experiences, you
quickly learn that you’re involved in a joint venture with your
participants. If the experiences you design don’t fit with your participants’
perceptions of what leisure means to them, they will quickly go
elsewhere. We strongly believe that the lessons we’ve learned about
leisure experiences and the tools we’ve developed to design them have
relevance for all experience design contexts. We are excited to be a part of
this emerging field and to see the work we have enjoyed for so many years
more broadly applied.
   Bob completed an undergraduate degree in recreation from Indiana
University. At his first job in the Village of Oak Park, Illinois, he was
responsible for operating special events. The event plans he inherited
were mostly checklists of necessary supplies and scheduling information.
There was nothing about what was supposed to happen to the individuals
as a result of participating in these events. He started pondering what
unique experiences he would expect if he were coming to one of these
events and what it would take to ensure that these experiences occurred.
He then challenged his staff to do the same. They liked thinking this way,
and doing so became a standard operating procedure. They learned first
to identify the experiences intended and then to design the encounters,
interactions, and staging necessary to produce the experiences intended.
Since his first position in Oak Park, Bob has focused his career on building
and refining techniques to accomplish this basic proposition.
    Mat started thinking about experience design while floating down the
Main Salmon and Middle Fork of the Salmon Rivers in central Idaho.
During high school and college Mat worked as a guide on five-to-seven-
day whitewater trips for his father’s rafting company. Mat often noticed
significant changes in participants’ behaviors and relationships over the
course of a trip. Stress dissipated, people laughed and talked with each
other more, and individuals who started the trip as strangers quickly
developed meaningful friendships. As Mat observed these and other
positive changes, he started to wonder what it was about a multiday river
trip that facilitated these changes. Was it the magnificent natural setting,
the physically challenging nature of the activities, or the disconnect from
society and technology? His pondering the nature of these experiences on
the river eventually started him down a pathway of research, teaching,
and practice focused on experiences and their design.
    There is no generally accepted volume that defines fundamental
concepts of experience design, anchors these concepts in social science
literature, and provides pragmatic, usable tools for designing experiences.
In writing this book, we’ve done our best to integrate some of our favorite
experience design tools with insights and approaches gleaned from some
of the top contemporary experience thinkers like Joe Pine, Jim Gilmore,
Martin Seligman, Tom and David Kelly, Chip and Dan Heath, Mihaly
Csikszentmihalyi, Daniel Kahneman, and Walt Disney. The techniques
presented in this book are robust and will enable you to design new
experiences as well as deconstruct, analyze, and redesign existing ones.
   Understanding the social and psychological phenomena that facilitate
experiences will help you better design them. Don’t worry, we don’t get
too deep into theory, just enough to keep you on target to design
experiences that people will find engaging. The majority of the book deals
with specific techniques that we have used and taught to students for
more than twenty-five years. We also integrate design thinking as an
excellent approach for infusing innovation into the overall experience
design process. We believe you will find these topics very practical in
performing your day-to-day work of designing experiences.
   We owe thanks to a lot of people who helped in various ways to bring
this book to life. Foremost, we would like to thank our families and
especially our wives, Linda Rossman and Chenae Duerden, respectively, for
their support in our writing this book and throughout our careers. We had
some excellent undergraduate students, including Sydney Burgess,
Catherine Gardiner, and Madie Smith, who provided feedback on early
versions of the book. A number of our academic colleagues, including Dr.
Gary Ellis at Texas A&M University, Dr. Barbara Schlatter at Illinois State
University, and the faculty in the Department of Experience Design and
Management at Brigham Young University, have influenced our thinking
about experiences and have also provided valuable feedback during the
writing of this book. We are sure they will find included in the book some
of the ideas they have shared during discussions with us. The book is
better for their generous input.
   We want to thank B. Joseph Pine II for both his pioneering efforts to
bring attention to the experience economy and for graciously agreeing to
write a foreword for this book. We are also grateful to Myles Thompson,
editor at Columbia Business School Publishing, who believed in us and our
book project from the beginning. He and Brian Smith have been
supportive and most helpful in improving and completing this book.
Finally, we want to thank you for taking the time to read our book, and we
wish you good luck in your own experience design endeavors.

                                                 J. Robert Rossman (Bob)
                                                              Phoenix, AZ
                                                Mathew D. Duerden (Mat)
                                                                Provo, UT
                               PART ONE




          Understanding Experience


EVERYONE WANTS TO BE part of the experience economy these days. The
word experience is added as an adjective to almost everything (e.g., dining
experiences, check-in experiences, employee on boarding experiences).
Simply adding the word experience, though, does not automatically make
something a worthwhile experience. In this section we examine the
concepts of experience and experience design and develop definitions
that are grounded but pragmatic; these are definitions experience
designers can use to guide their work. Our examination of the psychology
of experience will help you understand the behavioral nature of
experience and what makes a great one. Finally, we provide a framework
of experience types from prosaic to transformational that will prepare you
for comprehensive experience design. This section will deepen your
understanding of experiences and give you the background you will need
to develop immersive and engaging experiences.
                             CHAPTER ONE




           Exploring Experiences and
               Experience Design


WHAT DO THE following companies have in common?

  •   USAA
  •   Costco
  •   Ritz Carlton
  •   JetBlue
  •   H-E-B
  •   Amazon
  •   Apple
  •   Netflix

This is a diverse group of organizations. Some offer products and others
provide services. The reason they’re on this list is because they each hold
the title of Net Promoter Score® (NPS) leader for 2018 in their various
industries.1 NPS is a measurement tool developed by Bain & Company’s
Fred Reichheld to assess customer brand loyalty.2 The score is calculated
by having customers respond on a 0–10 scale to this question: “How likely
would you be to recommend [company] to a friend or colleague?” If
customers answer with a 9 or 10, they’re promoters; if their answer is
between 0 and 6, they’re detractors. You then subtract the percentage of
total detractors from total promoters to calculate your score. In general,
although benchmarks vary across industries, an excellent NPS is above
50.3
   Here’s the previous list of companies along with their NPS scores:

  •   USAA: 79
  •   Costco: 79
  •   Ritz Carlton: 75
  •   JetBlue: 74
  •   H-E-B: 72
  •   Amazon: 68
  •   Apple: 63
  •   Netflix: 62

These organizations consistently convert customers into loyal brand
ambassadors. How do they do it? We believe the primary driver behind
their NPS success is the experience they deliver to customers. Whether it’s
selling entertainment in the case of Netflix or consumer goods in the case
of Costco, these companies have figured out how to design and
consistently deliver powerfully positive customer experiences.
Experiences matter across all industries. Companies that provide great
experiences to customers and employees succeed; those that don’t, fail.
Experiences matter in our personal lives as well. They shape our identities
and affect relationships with friends and families. This book aims to help
you understand the inner workings of experiences and how to design
them. Great experiences don’t happen serendipitously—they require
intentionality and planning. In this book we’re going to introduce you to
the insights and tools you need to become an excellent experience
designer.
   You are an experience designer whether or not you realize it. You are
constantly involved in authoring experiences for your customers,
colleagues, friends, and family. The relevant question is, Are you doing
this intentionally? Conscious and purposeful experience design is a key to
personal and professional success. Although some people (e.g., Walt
Disney) and organizations (e.g., Ritz Carlton) appear to have the innate
ability to deliver amazing experiences, the experiences they deliver are in
fact built on a foundation of meticulous and intentional design. While we
can’t guarantee that reading this book will turn you into the next Walt
Disney, we strongly believe that anyone can become a competent
experience designer.


                          Experiences Matter

If you are reading this book, you’re probably already on board with the
idea that experiences matter. Even so, we want to review some of the
primary reasons we think everyone should pay more attention to
experiences. Experiences power our modern economy. B. Joseph Pine II
and James H. Gilmore have been spreading the message of the experience
economy since the mid-1990s.4 Over the last 150 years we have moved
from an agrarian economy driven by harvesting commodities like corn
and coal, to an industrial economy built on manufacturing goods, to a
service economy consisting of delivering services, to our current
experience economy, where the central economic activity is designing
experiences. It’s an economy where consumers make purchasing decisions
based not simply on product features but also on the experiences they
facilitate.
    The companies listed earlier in the chapter convert customers into
promoters in large part because of the quality of the experiences they
provide. Pine and Gilmore’s classic example of this economic progression
is the escalating price point moving from unprocessed coffee beans
(commodity), to coffee grounds (product), to a generic cup of coffee
(service), and finally to a high-end cup of Starbucks coffee (experience).5
In essence, people are willing to pay more for the same basic product if it’s
wrapped in a desirable experience.
    This economic progression involves transitioning economic activity
from delivering a service to providing an engaging experience. A
continuing controversy is whether experience is different from service or
simply a different kind of service. We think it is different. A service is a
unique category of economic activity. In some cases, the service being
purchased is access to a special piece of equipment or skill in using it—for
example, sharpening ice skates. One can obtain a hand sharpener and do it
oneself, but a good sharpening requires a special machine and skill in
using it. Other services involve hiring someone to do an unpleasant task
like washing windows. This can be performed by the homeowner because
it does not require special skill. But people employ others to do the service
because they do not have time or do not like to do the job.
    An experience differs in that it requires the customer to be consciously
engaged and the engagement is sustained through volitional actions of
the participant. Consider the monikers used to describe the recipients of
each. Service organizations think of their customers as guests, clients,
patients, etc., all implying that something needs to be done for them.
Experience-producing organizations think of their customers as
participants. The technology writer Clay Shirky points out, “Participants
are different. To participate is to act as if your presence matters, as if,
when you see something or hear something, your response is part of the
event.”6 Experience demands conscious attention, engagement, and action
—in a word, participation. The experiences we are preparing you to design
will be immersive and engaging, requiring attention and action by the
participant.
   Supersizing service does not transform it to an experience. For
example, hotels now speak of not just serving but pampering their
visitors. Such an approach still remains a service; the provider is doing
something to or for the client, now even more intently. Although a
supersized service may be intense, its effects are usually fleeting and must
be purchased again. Service is sustained by the provider instead of the
participant; even so, service provision needs to be high quality. We discuss
attributes of high-quality services, which we define as technical factors
(see chapter 9). Almost all the experiences discussed in this book contain
service components that need to be delivered well to enhance the
experience, but they are not the experience.
   Let’s now consider the importance of engaging experiences on a more
personal level. Consider the following thought exercise shared with us by
our good friend and colleague Dr. Gary Ellis, who is a leading experience
design scholar at Texas A & M University.7

    1. Think of some of your most cherished memories. Invariably,
       many of these have to do with specific experiences you’ve had.
    2. Now decide a price it would take for you to be willing to part
       with these memories.

What number did you come up with—$50, $500, $5,000, or $50,000? Have
you set a higher price? In many cases when individuals are asked this
question, they refuse to name an amount because they could never
imagine parting with important memories. We value our most precious
memories, and these memories come from our experiences. Research
conducted by Paul Ratner and by Elizabeth Dunn and Michael Norton
shows that spending money on experiences has a greater, long-lasting
effect on happiness levels than spending money on material goods.8 We
may experience a momentary rush, like a sugar high, from purchasing a
product, but the novelty and the importance of that item will invariably
fade with time. In contrast, investing in experiences leads to increased
returns because memories of positive experiences ripen and become even
more important when recalled and reflected on over time.
   As important as it is to design and deliver good experiences, it’s
perhaps even more important, especially in our digitally connected world,
to avoid negative customer experiences. In other words, you want to avoid
an experience becoming memorable because it was a bad one! In the pre-
social-media world, when companies delivered bad experiences, the only
people who heard about them were usually the close friends and
associates of the recipient of the experience. Now, bad experiences are
broadcast to the world through social media.9
   Consider the case of Dave Carroll, whose guitar was damaged on a
United Airlines flight. After the airline refused to pay for the damages, he
and his band made a music video about the experience that garnered over
sixteen million views on YouTube. The fallout from this one experience
purportedly cost United Airlines millions.10 As you read this, you’re
probably thinking of examples of the latest negative customer or
employee experience to go viral. Companies can no longer hope the
occasional poorly delivered customer experience will simply go away;
good experiences need to be consistently delivered to build and maintain
customer loyalty, and bad ones need to be quickly repaired.
   Companies are also beginning to realize that the experiences they
provide for their employees are as important as those they provide for
their customers. In their 2017 Global Human Capital Trends report for
Deloitte Insights, Josh Bersin and his colleagues note that improving the
employee experience was identified as the fourth most important trend in
rewriting employment rules for the digital age: “Today, companies are
looking at employee journeys, studying the needs of their workforce, and
using net promoter scores to understand the employee experience.”11
They also assert that good employee experiences translate into good
customer experiences. Paychecks and standard benefits are no longer
enough to attract top applicants in competitive industries. Just like
prospective customers, employees are also looking for great experiences.
   The bottom line is that experiences matter. On an organizational level,
well-designed experiences can help companies build customer loyalty,
attract and retain employees, and rise above the competition. They are so
important that experience and experience outcomes are now included as
strategic outcomes for corporations. Although this book is focused on
developing the ability to design and deliver experiences at the individual
interactional level, we do provide some examples of their inclusion in
corporate strategic planning (see chapter 10). On a personal level, great
experiences are what make life enjoyable and meaningful. While some
great experiences happen spontaneously, the consistent delivery of high-
quality experiences requires knowledgeable, intentional experience
design. Creating great experiences is also personally rewarding work; it is
an endeavor we think you’ll enjoy as much as we do.


                        What Are Experiences?
Because so many people are talking about experiences right now, you
would think everyone is on the same page regarding what experiences
actually are. To illustrate this point, ask a few people the question, “What
is an experience?” More than likely, you will get a different answer from
each person. Although experiences are commonplace, they are also
complex, making defining them a bit tricky. Often, people will provide an
example of an experience they have had rather than defining the actual
phenomenon of experiences. Examples are not definitional. The lack of an
accepted definition is a bit concerning to us because it’s hard to design
something that you cannot define.
   In some cases, attempts to define experiences focus on describing the
context (e.g., customer, leisure, educational) in which the experience
occurs. While it is true that these context-based experiences have certain
unique characteristics, such a categorization falls short of providing a
generalizable definition of experience. The English language also makes
defining experiences difficult. Whereas other languages, like German,
have multiple terms for experience, English assigns multiple meanings to
the same word.12 For example, experience can mean “knowledge or skill
acquired from cumulative exposure” (as in “I have twenty years’
experience in my field”) or “past events that represent a shared
community” (as in “the American experience”).
   For our purposes, we’re interested in experience in the sense of
something you personally accomplish, something that you do to affect
outcomes, or something that makes you feel a certain way (e.g., “I had a
great experience playing tennis”). This more active form implies
conscious awareness of and engagement with what’s happening around
you. Interestingly, the word experience originates from the Latin experiri,
which means “to try or to attempt”; it denotes active engagement.13
                          Defining Experience

Now that we’ve discussed some basic features of experiences, we will turn
our attention to developing a working definition of experience. In its
simplest form, experience is consciousness of ongoing interaction. The
experiences we discuss in this book require reciprocal interaction between
individuals and their surroundings. This interaction must be sustained by
the deliberate engagement of the individuals participating in the
experience. They are immersive, engaged experiences, not passive ones
resulting from service encounters. For an experience to occur, you have to
be aware that something is happening around you and you’re contributing
to the resulting outcomes. Our primary interest is in more complex
experiences, the kind of experiences that turn customers into
ambassadors and employees into advocates. To build an actionable
definition of experience, we need to briefly discuss a few additional
components of experiences (see figure 1.1).14
   First, experiences are multiphased: each experience consists of an
anticipation phase, a participation phase, and a reflection phase. Second,
within each phase, multiple sequential interactions occur between the
participant and the elements of the designed experience. We’ll provide a
more detailed discussion of these elements in chapter 4 because these are
the primary building blocks you will need to take account of or
manipulate when designing experiences. For now, you should think of
these elements as the people, places, and things that make up the
experience. Third, interactions between the participant and the elements
of the experience co-create a variety of potential results driven largely by
the participant’s perceptions and reactions in the experience. These
perceptions, labeled “perceived results” in figure 1.1, could include
thoughts, emotions, attitudes, or behaviors. They are minded outcomes
resulting from intentional reflection triggered by active engaged
participation in the experience.




Figure 1.1 Foundational experience components. Modified from Mat D. Duerden, Peter J. Ward, and
Patti A. Freeman, “Experiences: Seeking Interdisciplinary Integration,” Journal of Leisure Research 47,
no. 5 (2015), 612.


    Combining the foundational components in figure 1.1, we offer the
following definition of experience: Experience is a unique interactional
phenomenon resulting from conscious awareness and reflective interpretation of
experience elements that is sustained by a participant, culminating in personally
perceived results and memories.
    Experiences present in two formats: micro- and macroexperiences.
Microexperiences are discrete interactional episodes across the
anticipation, participation, and reflection phases that together constitute the
cumulative macroexperience. The macro/microexperience designation is
based on the elevation from which you view the experience. A single
vacation could be seen as a microexperience if the perspective is the full
life experience of an individual, or it could be broken down into all the
microexperiences that occurred during the vacation. It’s important to
understand that you often will find yourself switching between these two
perspectives as you design experiences. We’ll have more to say about this
in chapters 5 and 6.


    Using Foundational Experience Components: An Example

Consider how we can use the experience components just introduced to
deconstruct a fairly commonplace experience like going to a restaurant.
During the anticipation phase of this experience, you begin thinking about
going out for dinner. You probably start by considering what type of food
you would like, whom you would like to go with, the price you would like
to pay, and where you might like to go. If you’re always looking for the
next great place to eat, you may look at restaurant reviews and menus
online. All these thought processes and decisions represent interactions
between you and the elements of the experience, including those provided
by external entities (e.g., restaurant review apps, social media posts,
online menus) and those of your own making (e.g., friends you want to
invite, your mode of transportation to the restaurant, your budget). One
of these will likely be the principal driver of your decision making. For
example, you primarily want to go to dinner with friends, and where you
go and what is served are of less importance.
   The transition from the anticipation phase to the participation phase
usually occurs as you begin to interact with elements of the actual
experience. In our example, this could include microexperiences like
arriving at and walking into the restaurant. It deserves noting that the
subjective results of the anticipation phase spill over into the
participation phase. For example, if you read some great reviews about the
restaurant, you will likely bring a positive attitude as you enter the
participation phase. If you called ahead and made a reservation, the host
will greet you with a reserved table for you and your friends. The
interaction between your positive attitude about the restaurant and the
expedited seating process will most likely produce continued positive
feelings about the experience—or in the language of our experience
definition, a positive perceived result . It’s also easy to imagine how the
perceived outcome of this initial participation phase could be different if
you had read negative reviews about the restaurant, the restaurant didn’t
take reservations, or you were not given a suitable welcome by the host.
Additional microexperiences like ordering, receiving, and eating food;
talking with friends; and paying for your meal also occur during the
participation phase. For an account of how some restaurant corporations
think about and design the interactions in a dining experience, see the Fox
Restaurant Concepts and Brinker International entries in chapter 10.
   After leaving the restaurant, you enter the reflection phase of the
experience, and your perceived results from the participation phase will
influence your perceived outcome of the overall experience. This
transition is marked by a switch from engaging in the actual experience to
reflecting on what happened. The reflection phase is especially relevant
after you experience something very negative or very positive. Most of
your life experiences have short, weak reflection phases because they
aren’t especially memorable. But for those that are either very good or
very bad, the reflection phase often includes conversations about the
experience with others, either in person or through social media; looking
at pictures taken during the experience; or simply reflecting back on the
experience. One’s summary judgment about the experience is malleable at
this point and influenced by the internalized narrative of personal
reflection as well as discussions with others who participated. The
perceived results of the reflection phase often determine whether you
consider returning to the restaurant again, which brings you back to the
anticipation phase, where the process begins anew. The experience loop
terminates if you decide to never return.
   As you can see, experiences—even those as familiar as going out to eat
—are complex, and designing them is an intricate and involved process. It
requires more than simply giving lip service to the importance of
customer service. Designing experiences requires an intentional, tested
process to create experiences that will lead participants through a
sequence of interactions across all three experience phases, interactions
that produce results desired by the participant and intended by the
experience designer. The tools and knowledge we include in later chapters
will provide a methodology for designing experiences to produce the
results desired.


                       What Is Experience Design?

Now that we’ve defined experience, let’s turn our attention to defining
experience design. Increased interest in experiences has led to multiple
experience design approaches. You may have heard such terms as user
experience design, customer experience design, and service experience design, to
name a few. Each of these refers to the application of the experience
design process within a specific context:

   • User experience design (UX design) focuses on the design of
     human-computer interactions.
   • Customer experience design deals with the design of customer-
     company interactions.
   • Service experience design involves intentionally creating effective
     and positive service encounters.
Specialization within experience design is important because the nuances
of each context warrant some degree of customization. For example, in UX
design there is a continuing issue about the locus of the experience. Is the
experience the interaction with the computer, or is the computer simply a
window that provides a conduit to the experience? Unique contextual
issues aside, there are more commonalities than differences across these
fields, but limited communication between them and the lack of a shared
foundation are problematic.
   The experience design writer Brian Solis had the following to say about
this disconnect: “It’s rare for specialists in these several disciplines [brand
experience, customer experience, and user experience] to interact, and
even less common for companies to integrate them in experience design
efforts. This is a travesty, as they have much to share with each other.”15
For the most part, these subdisciplines of experience design have
developed independently of one another and without efforts to identify
common ground on which all could build.
   Innovation often works this way, with new ideas emerging
independently and simultaneously. The sociologist Robert Merton called
this phenomenon “multiple discoveries.” Long lists of these simultaneous
innovations exist, such as calculus, the theory of evolution, and the atomic
bomb. Multiple discoveries seem to occur “when prerequisite kinds of
knowledge and tools accumulate in man’s cultural store, and when the
attention of an appreciable number of investigators becomes focused on a
problem.”16
   The simultaneous development of experience design subfields came
about as individuals and industries became aware of the importance of
experiences and realized that they needed to take steps to approach their
design more intentionally. An example of this is the recent trend of
organizations’ creating the position of chief experience officer because
they know delivering great experiences is important yet they do not fully
know what they want individuals in this position to do.17 Although an
increasing recognition of the need for an experience design methodology
exists, consensus is still lacking on what exactly experience design is or
should be. As Peter Benz noted in his book Experience Design: Concepts and
Case Studies, “The full potential of experience design as a distinct creative
discipline in its own right still needs to be articulated and recognized.”18
Experience design should be defined in a generalizable way that positions
it as the foundational field of all its related subfields (e.g., user experience,
customer experience, service experience). This book makes an effort to
define experience design and present its key tenets and tools in a way that
promotes broad applicability.
    Before revealing our proposed definition of experience design, let’s
look at the meaning of the words experience and design. The previous
section dealt with the term experience at length, but as a reminder, some
key elements to its definition include its multiphased nature, conscious
awareness, and the interaction between participants and experience
elements leading to perceived results. Design is a word like experience, with
multiple meanings depending on its usage. We like the definition provided
by Harold G. Nelson and Erik Stolterman in their insightful book The
Design Way. They view design as “the ability to imagine that-which-does-
not-yet-exist, to make it appear in concrete form as a new, purposeful
addition to the real world.”19 When you engage in design, you
intentionally create something in order to produce a desired change, a
planned intervention with a purposeful intention.
    By combining the concepts we’ve shared for experience and design, we
offer the following definition of experience design: Experience design is the
process of intentionally orchestrating experience elements to provide opportunities
for participants to co-create and sustain interactions that lead to results desired by
the participant and the designer. Experiences are complex and ever present,
but to create experiences that truly stand out and produce intended
results, someone must intervene in a purposeful way. That someone
should be an experience designer, and that designer could be you.


                       Summary: Let’s Get Going

We’ve set the stage with definitions for experience and experience design.
We hope that you now recognize the complexities of experiences and the
interactive process whereby experiences produce results. Anyone can
schedule a get-together for a group of people, and in the process of
interacting, some outcome will result. But the act of designing and
delivering an experience that produces results valued by the participant
and the provider requires an intentional process. Our goal in the chapters
that remain is to give you the knowledge and tools you need to design
experiences in any context and for any population. This is an
interdisciplinary field, and we draw from a variety of disciplines as we
guide you along the path toward experience design expertise. We will also
continually highlight the differences between experiences and services.
   Before wrapping up this chapter, we want to make a couple of quick
terminology-housekeeping comments. We will at times use the term
experience staging or experience stager to refer, respectively, to the act of
delivering an experience and to those individuals who facilitate the
experience-staging process. Most of the time we use the term experience
stager when we’re referring to frontline employees who directly interact
with end users. We will also use a few different terms to refer to the
individuals who engage in the experiences you design, including customer,
participant, and end user. We decided to use these terms interchangeably
to reflect the diverse nature of the individuals for whom readers of this
book will be designing experiences. Personally, we prefer participant
because the word connotes the deliberate interaction needed for co-
creation.
   When you’re done reading this book, you will be off to a good start on
becoming an experience designer. You will have a grasp of foundational
topics and tools that will allow you to design innovative, intentional
experiences. Let’s now move on to the next step on our experience design
journey: a review of the work of some of the top sociopsychological
thinkers about the phenomenon of experiences.
                             CHAPTER TWO




    What Makes a Great Experience?


FOR A FEW summers while Mat was earning his master’s degree, he and
his wife, Chenae, codirected a wilderness adventure camp for
disadvantaged adolescents in the mountains of central Idaho. One of the
youth participants, whom we’ll call Tom, was short and wiry with a
massive mop of messy blonde hair. He showed up at camp with a
skateboard, even though there was no place to skate, and a lot of energy. It
was not easy to capture Tom’s attention, and he was exasperating his
counselors. One day as Mat was making his rounds through camp, one of
the counselors came up to him and told him there was something he had
to see.
   It turned out to be Tom, who was standing perfectly still with his hand
outstretched toward a hummingbird feeder hanging from a tree. The
counselor told Mat that Tom’s group had been learning about birds that
day and had been told that if they put sugar water on their hand and held
it very still by the feeder, a hummingbird might land on their hand. For
whatever reason, this prospect had fascinated Tom so much that he was
willing to stand still—something that had not yet happened during his
waking hours at camp—for the chance of having a hummingbird land on
his hand. To his delight, it happened after a few minutes of waiting.
   During this experience, Tom was fully in the moment. His attention was
totally concentrated on the task at hand with little to no awareness of the
world around him. Something about the chance to physically connect
with a bird—with which he shared some similar behavioral patterns—
captured and held his attention. Successful experience designers strive to
deliver attention-captivating experiences like Tom’s hummingbird
encounter. The question is, How do you do this consistently? In this
chapter we’re going to look at a body of sociopsychological research to
learn principles you can use to guide your experience design efforts.
   What you will read in the remainder of this chapter may seem a bit
obtuse to designing experiences. Trust us that this knowledge will help
you design better and more intentional experiences. Too many in the field
do not take the time to study the social psychology of experiencing before
they begin designing experiences. This chapter will provide you with a
deeper understanding of experiences and thereby make you a better
designer of them.


                             Play and Flow

Our brains crave stimulation. It’s why smartphones are so addicting—
they’re highly effective providers of visual and auditory stimulation as
well interactive tactile and cognitive stimulation.1 Our brains want us to
interact with our environment so that we can learn, grow, and adapt. It’s
why kids need to play. In the late 1960s and early 1970s, Dr. Michael Ellis
conducted observational studies of children in his Play Research Lab at the
University of Illinois.2 He was interested in understanding the motivations
behind and outcomes resulting from unstructured play. Ellis’s research
showed that play provided children with a vehicle to obtain and maintain
optimal levels of physical stimulation and cognitive arousal. Subsequent
research has strengthened the case for play serving an essential
developmental role for children and adults.3
   Kids use play to find the sweet spot between understimulation (I’m
bored) and overstimulation (I’m anxious). As adults, we also seek
experiences that provide just the right amount of stimulation. You would
think that in a world with unending sources of stimulation, it would be
easy to know how to pay attention to the types of experiences that would
provide our brains with the right amount of feedback. Unfortunately,
having too many choices actually impairs our decision-making ability and
so we end up watching Netflix or engaging in other activities that tend to
sedate rather than stimulate our brains.4
   We all have had experiences, like Tom’s hummingbird encounter, that
have fully captured and held our attention. What is it about such
experiences that make them so captivating? This question was, in part,
what Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi set out to answer when he began studying
the experiences of highly creative individuals.5 Using a method called
“experience sampling,” which involved paging participants at random
times during the day and having them complete a few questions about
what they were doing and how they were feeling, Csikszentmihalyi
discovered a common set of characteristics that study participants used to
describe uniquely captivating experiences. He adopted the term flow, a
word used frequently by respondents to label these types of experiences.
   As Csikszentmihalyi’s study of flow continued, he developed a list of
descriptive characteristics of flow experiences. He also found that flow
could occur in almost any context (work or leisure) and during any
activity (from rock climbing to quilting) if the experience exhibited the
following qualities:
  • Clear goals—you know what you’re trying to accomplish in the
    activity.
  • Immediate feedback—you know how well you’re doing in relation
    to the stated goals as you engage in the experience.
  • Balance between challenge and skill—the experience provides the
    right amount of challenge in relation to your level of requisite
    skills.
  • Merging of action and awareness—you are completely focused and
    engaged with the experience at hand.
  • Loss of self-consciousness—you are so engrossed in the experience
    that you lose awareness of other things happening around you,
    including concern for what others may be thinking of you.
  • Time becomes distorted—you lose complete track of time, and
    experiences that seem to take only minutes may actually have
    taken hours.
  • Your participation is intrinsically motivated—you want to
    participate for the sake of the experience as opposed to some
    external reward.6

Think about Tom’s experience with the hummingbird. Each of these
qualities is clearly exhibited in that experience. He had a clear goal in
mind, he received feedback in the form of the hummingbird’s proximity to
his hand throughout the experience, he was entirely focused on the
experience, the activity provided him with a good balance between his
skill level and the required challenge, he completely forgot about the
world around him, he lost track of time, and he was intrinsically
motivated.
   The individuals for whom you are designing experiences are looking for
experiences that capture their attention. We all want to find flow-
producing experiences to fill at least portions of our day. As experience
designers, we can use the insights about human experiences gleaned by
researchers like Mike Ellis and Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi. Their work
highlights that quality experiences occur only when individuals recognize
and respond to what’s happening around them. You have to catch people’s
attention and engage them if you want to provide them with a sustainable
experience. Second, you need to find the sweet spot when designing and
staging experiences in which you provide enough stimulation to catch and
hold people’s attention but not so much that they become overwhelmed,
anxious, or confused. This means that you have to understand the people
for whom you are providing experiences. What types of knowledge, skill
levels, attitudes, and so on do they personally bring to the experience?
You also need to understand some general principles of human
psychology in order to design engaging, positive experiences.


             What Do People Really Want to Experience?

Although experiences can produce a great variety of results, your first
step in designing them is intentionally focusing on a finite number of
specific desirable results that you have some probability of delivering. A
classic mistake of experience design is to begin with your end in mind
rather than what your participants want. Some organizations will have
outcomes they want produced by the experiences they sponsor. For
example, the YMCA (the Y) has specific organizational outcomes it desires
from the programs it offers; the Y’s three foci are youth development,
healthy living, and social responsibility.7 All the programs the Y offers are
targeted to achieve one of these outcomes. But participants’ needs always
deserve consideration because meeting participants’ wants and solving
their problems will have a strong influence on how they evaluate the
experience and what they tell others about it. While acknowledging that
every individual has unique needs, positive psychology offers insights into
what results generally have the greatest positive effect and accordingly
are most desired by participants.
    In Authentic Happiness, Martin E. P. Seligman, the father of positive
psychology, discusses the power of positive experiences. He states that
“experiences that induce positive emotion cause negative emotion to
dissipate rapidly.”8 This simple and straightforward statement is backed
up by significant amounts of supportive research. Seligman also contends
that happiness or positive emotion is only one component of healthy
psychological functioning. Paul Dolan, in his book Happiness by Design,
adds to this discussion by noting the need for purpose in addition to
pleasure in the experiences we pursue. He introduces the pleasure-pain
principle (PPP), which states that pleasure is contrasted with pain, and
purpose is contrasted with pointlessness.9 A life dilemma he discusses is
the need to balance pleasure with purpose. Engaging only in pleasures
without purpose does not make us feel good, nor does engaging only in
purposeful activities.
    Whom we engage with in experiences also matters. Seligman suggests
that social bonding is a key facilitator of positive psychological
functioning. In a study in which he and a colleague analyzed the very
happiest 10 percent of college students from a pool of 222 students, social
bonding was found to be a key differentiating factor. These “very happy”
people differed markedly from individuals with average and low levels of
happiness in one principal way: they enjoyed a rich and fulfilling social
life. They spent the least amount of time alone (and the most time
socializing), and they were rated highest on good relationships by
themselves and their friends.10 Dolan seconds this conclusion. After
reviewing two large sets of happiness data from the United States and
Germany, he concludes, “We can also show that we are again happier
when we are interacting with other people.”11
   Chip and Dan Heath, in their book The Power of Moments, suggest shared
experiences, especially those that allow people to struggle together while
working to obtain a meaningful goal, build powerful and deep connections
between individuals.12 Think about those individuals in your own life you
feel most connected to—we bet you’ve had the type of experiences with
them that the Heath brothers are describing.
   In Seligman’s most recent book, Flourish, he introduced the PERMA
model as a framework to present the necessary elements of optimal
psychological functioning. He suggests that individuals live more fulfilling
lives when they have experiences that produce the following results:13

  • Positive emotion—leads to happiness. We all want to have
    experiences that produce positive emotions: the excitement of a
    first date, the joy of seeing a child take her first step, the
    satisfaction and savoring that comes from eating an expertly
    prepared meal.
  • Engagement—a subjective state that draws heavily on flow
    theory and is present when individuals can answer affirmatively
    to such questions as “‘Did time stop for you?’ ‘Were you
    completely absorbed in the task?’ ‘Did you lose self-
    consciousness?’”14 We all want and seek experiences that draw us
    in and engage our full attention.
  • Relationships—we all need meaningful positive relationships
    with people who are important to us. Seligman states, “Very little
    that is positive is solitary…. Other people are the best antidotes to
    the downs of life and the single most reliable up.”15
  • Meaning—defined by Seligman as “belonging to and serving
    something that you believe is bigger than the self.”16 Meaning can
    be found in a career you consider to be a calling,17 involvement in
    volunteer causes, or religiously motivated service, to name a few
    examples.
  • Accomplishment—the pursuit of achievement for its own sake.
    This can be fulfilled in both the personal and the professional
    sphere. It represents a desire to develop domain mastery, not for
    praise or remuneration, but simply to gain a sense of competence.

The foregoing list is an important source of outcomes individuals are
likely to desire in the experiences you design. They are abstract but
universally applicable outcomes. Your job is to design experiences that
allow participants to feel positive emotion, become engaged, build
relationships, find meaning, and develop competence. If you can facilitate
even one of these outcome categories with your experience, you’re on the
right track.
   Research by Richard Ryan and Edward Deci18 dovetails nicely with
Seligman’s work. Ryan and Deci propose that since we have basic physical
needs (e.g., food, shelter, water), we must also have basic psychological
needs. Numerous studies support the conclusion, first proposed by Ryan
and Deci, that to experience healthy psychological functioning,
individuals need to experience adequate levels of autonomy, competence,
and relatedness.19 Autonomy is the sense that you have control over your
actions and choices, competence is having the necessary skills for a
particular activity, and relatedness is feeling connected with people who
value and care about you. Ryan and Deci’s research has shown that when
basic psychological needs are met, people experience a variety of positive
outcomes and feel a greater sense of intrinsic motivation.
                The Psychology of Great Experiences

If we look at the findings from the research reviewed thus far in this
chapter, we can draw a few relevant conclusions for experience designers.
First, experiences are potential sources for the stimulation our brains
need to promote development and healthy psychological functioning.
Second, the best experiences accomplish the following:

  • Produce positive emotions
  • Engage attention
  • Help develop and strengthen relationships
  • Provide meaning through connections to something larger than
    ourselves
  • Promote competence
  • Grant autonomy

Although some experiences may facilitate everything on this list, such
experiences are rare, and that’s okay. We would become emotionally
drained if every experience we had during the course of the day were
meeting all those needs. This list provides experience designers a cafeteria
of psychological outcomes they can draw from and incorporate into the
experiences they are designing or already providing. For example, how
can you tweak current experiences to provide more autonomy or design
new experiences to better promote competence? There are countless
results that may be targeted when designing experiences or improving
the delivery of current ones. But the experiences you design will be more
meaningful if they encompass and facilitate at least some of the results
discussed in this chapter.
                          Allocating Attention

So, you’ve gained some insights about what people need and want out of
experiences. Don’t forget that experiences exist only when they capture
and sustain someone’s conscious attention. You also know that the quality
of the attention we give to things is not always the same. Consider the
attention you would give on a hike to the song of a bird versus the rattling
of a rattlesnake. One stimulus, the rattling, would most likely produce a
higher degree of focused attention than the other stimulus, the song of a
bird. The intensity of mental involvement in experiences was examined by
Daniel Kahneman, who documented that the speed and intensity of
thinking varies in different situations. He identifies two types of thinking:

  • System 1 operates automatically and quickly, with little or no
    effort and no sense of voluntary control.
  • System 2 allocates attention to the effortful mental activities that
    demand it, including complex computations. The operations of
    system 2 are often associated with the subjective experience of
    agency, choice, and concentration.20

   System 1 thinking occurs quickly and involves little conscious
attention. It makes up many of our daily experiences. In these
experiences, information is familiar, routine, and quickly dealt with. These
experiences do include cognitive awareness but not the rational
processing of information that characterizes system 2 thinking. In our
hiking example, hearing the song of a bird, a commonplace occurrence,
would trigger system 1 thinking. We would most likely register hearing
the song but wouldn’t direct too much more attention to it than that.
   Allow us a quick digression to illustrate how uniquely personal
interpretations of stimuli can be. The previous scenario would not likely
be true for individuals interested in ornithology. They would pay much
more attention to the bird’s song than other people and would likely
spend some time identifying the bird’s species. We digress to drive home
the notion that estimating how individuals will react to the stimuli
provided in experiences can be difficult to predict accurately, and the
more you know about participants, the better predictions you can make.
   System 2 thinking is slower and more deliberate than system 1
thinking. It involves rational thought processing—the kind of interactive
engagement likely needed to sustain interest and result in lasting
memories. System 2 thinking is triggered by experiences that demand
more concentrated attention like deciding which job offer to accept or
how to respond to the nearby presence of a rattlesnake. Kahneman points
out that many of our system 1 thoughts were derived at some point from
system 2 deliberations. So, for him, system 2 is the key system because it
provides a mechanism for memory. Each of us acquired our system 1
repertoire through our own history with system 2 experiences. Thus, you
must remember when designing experiences that each person has a
unique experiential history derived from previous system 2 interactions
that he or she will use to process and perceive the experiences you
provide.
   Kahneman’s work calls into question the notion that we should always
be offering experiences that lead to lasting memories. This may be too
large an order for routine daily production! Much of what we do each day
—many of the touchpoints in an individual’s journey—is likely to involve
system 1 thinking, an unmemorable experience. This is confirmed by Chip
and Dan Heath: “The surprise about great service experiences is that they
are mostly forgettable and occasionally remarkable.”21 Yet, because of the
admonishment of current literature, practitioners are badgered to offer
memory-producing experiences that can result only from system 2
thinking. And not unexpectedly, given some of this new information, they
are failing and frustrated.


                 Designing Memorable Experiences

The marketing and consumer-behavior literature is full of admonitions to
deliver memorable experiences. Yet we find almost no discussion about
the phenomenon of memory! Let’s at least investigate it a little. A quick
review of literature about memory informs us that memory is the process
by which our brains encode, store, and retrieve information.22 Without
memory you would be lost, needing to relearn everything each day. We all
generally understand the existence of short-term versus long-term
memory. Short-term is used during system 2 thinking, which requires us
to remember multiple facts on a short-term basis to use during intense
thinking and processing of information. The information that results from
this processing is then selectively committed to our long-term memory
for recall in the future as needed.
   During experiences, you are consciously aware of many bits of
incoming information being accessed through your five senses—taste,
smell, sound, sight, and touch. You are aware of these information bits for
a brief time and then select a few to use in your short-term memory for
information processing. Through reflection and interpretation, you
further select information to forget or to commit to long-term memory.
Long-term memory is also known as declarative memory, which comprises
facts and events that can be consciously recalled. There are two types of
declarative memory: semantic, which is learned, and episodic, which is
drawn from personal experience.
   As Jennifer Ouellette notes, recent research has provided some
interesting results about how experience in imprinted in our episodic
memory:

  How the brain fixes the timing of the events we experience depends
  on episodic memory. Whenever you remember key events from your
  past, you are tapping into episodic memory, which encodes what
  happened, where it happened, and when it happened, doing so for
  all our remembered experiences. Neuroscientists know the brain
  must have a kind of internal clock or pacemaker to help it track
  those experiences and record them as memories.23

   Researchers at the Kalvi Institute for Systems Neuroscience in Norway
have discovered that experiences are not encoded or remembered in
metric or circadian time as are most other events. How time in
experiences is remembered differs fundamentally from how other kinds of
temporal events are remembered.24 Experiences are encoded in two
separate areas of the brain, one area that records spatial information and
the other that time stamps the order of events in an experience. These
separate pieces of information are integrated in the hippocampus “to
store a unified representation of what, where, and when.”25 This section of
the brain’s limbic system registers an experience by integrating the time
order of what occurred and the space in which it occurred. In an article by
Rita Elmkvist Nilsen, Kalvi Institute Researcher Albert Tsao states, “The
network (referring to the three areas of the brain that jointly accomplish
this, sic) does not explicitly encode time. What we measure is rather a
subjective time derived from the ongoing flow of experience.”26 It is
interesting that Csikszentmihalyi also deduced this term flow from his
work. Physiologically, experience is handled uniquely in our brain, not as
other phenomena.
   In the same article, Nilsen in reporting the work of the Kalvi research
teams states, “Experience, and the succession of events within experience,
are thus the substance of which subjective time is generated and
measured by the brain.”27 Professor Edvar Moser, one of the researchers
and a Nobel Prize recipient for his work in discovering how the brain
accounts for space and our position within it, notes, “With this work, we
have found an area with activity so strong relating to the time of an event
or experience, it may open up a whole new research field.”28
   What does this mean for designing experiences? Your goal should be to
create experiences that are memorable. Memorable experiences are
recorded in episodic memory. Their physical location (the space they
occupy) and the sequential separate engagements that constitute the
experiences matter and become a part of a person’s memory of them. The
findings of this current research confirm that the techniques we are
recommending matter in designing memorable experiences. Our
speculation is that experiences likely to be memorable are those that
occur in unique spaces and have special memorable engagements as part
of their design that will facilitate future recall. Experience designers need
to include both of these features in a design to ensure that experiences are
memorable.


                        Producing Experiences?

It is well known that the interest in the concept of experience in business
was initiated by the publication of B. Joseph Pine II and James H. Gilmore’s
The Experience Economy: Work Is Theatre and Every Business a Stage ,29 which
was followed with an updated edition in 2011.30 Pine and Gilmore
introduced a major point of departure from existing thought—that
experience is a fourth type of economic activity in addition to
commodities, goods, and services and that experience is a unique
differentiating factor consumers are willing to pay for. Along these lines,
the business writer Brian Solis suggests that “experiences are more
important than products now. In fact, experiences are products.”31 In
essence, if you’re not providing great experiences, regardless of your
industry, you will not survive.
   Let’s examine how Pine and Gilmore have raised awareness of the
economic importance of experiences. Their concept of experience rests on
three propositions. First, experiences are different from services. When a
customer “buys an experience, he [or she] pays to spend time enjoying a
series of memorable events that a company stages—as in a theatrical play
—to engage him [or her] in a personal way.”32 Second, individuals are
willing to pay more for experiences than for commodities, products, or
services. Third, customization enhances experiences. This does not mean
simply offering customers more choices, because, as Schwartz has
revealed, having too many choices impedes decision making and creates
frustrations for consumers.33 The best experiences reveal customized
options, based on participants’ needs over time and within the context of
the experience.34 The streaming music service Spotify does this with its
daily mix playlists, which are custom built for you each day based on the
music you have most recently been listening to.
   To illustrate these ideas, Pine and Gilmore provide a narrative that
reframes thinking about the role of workers and the workplace,
concluding that “work is theatre” wherein companies stage plays that
engage customers.35 In using this model, they are careful to note the
pitfall of “equating experiences with entertainment.”36 They stress that
“staging experiences is not about entertaining customers, it’s about
engaging them.”37 Indeed, it is! End users need to be engaged as actors in
the unfolding narrative of the experience rather than simply remaining
observers of it; they must become participants.
   The same is true for employees. The authors of a Deloitte Insight trends
report note, “High-performing companies have found ways to enrich the
employee experience, leading to purposeful, productive, meaningful
work.”38 This result is accomplished by expanding and redefining an
employee’s relationship with the employer. This approach assumes a more
holistic view of life at work enabled by obtaining constant feedback from
employees to monitor and take action to improve their ability to do their
day-to-day work.
   Too often efforts to create experiences result in customer service
improvements, not the creation of an experience. Customers remain
audience members rather than actors in the production. Theater provides
an entertaining representational illusion, whereas experiences within the
experience economy should produce authentic, participatory
engagement. Theater is produced through enacting a static script, but an
experience is serendipitously co-created by the experience stager and
participants, resulting in unique experiences each time. These are
important differences in both production and result. Knowing this and its
implications for experience design puts you ahead of many who are
attempting to design experiences.
   Let us provide you with a quick example of theater as a co-created
experience. Mat once attended an immersive dance theater performance
entitled Sonder directed by his friend and dance professor Graham Brown.
Instead of taking place in a traditional theater setting, Sonder was staged
throughout a three-story historic building. The performers enacted the
show’s narrative throughout the building, and participants were
encouraged to wander freely. This meant that different scenes were
happening simultaneously throughout the building. To add to the
complexity and co-created nature of the experience, performers often
interacted directly with audience members and pulled them into the
action. For example, at one point a main character asked an audience
member to babysit his daughter so that he and his wife could go to a party.
The unique nature of Sonder transformed a traditional theater-as-
entertainment experience into a theater-as-immersive experience.
   Business Dictionary defines production as “processes and methods used to
transform tangible inputs (raw materials, semi-finished goods,
subassemblies) and intangible inputs (ideas, information, knowledge) into
goods or services.”39 To this list we need to add experiences. The addition
of experience introduces the question of whether experiences are
produced in a similar manner to goods and services. We don’t think they
are. Producing experience is a new paradigm of production because of the
requirement for co-creation with participants. Using theater arts
vernacular, we often call it “staging” to confirm that it is unique from
other types of production.
   The notion that producing experiences is simply an extension of
normal production processes is naively replete in the literature, and no
one is suggesting otherwise. What is missing is an understanding of how
experiences for individuals are produced. John R. Kelly states, “The leisure
experience [and, we add, experience in general] is never just receptive,
passive. It is an involving process in which the players are all acting in one
way or another.”40 It is produced one episode at a time by the people
participating in the experience. In providing a service, where something is
done to or for someone, control of production remains with the producer.
Producing experience, however, requires a different paradigm of
production, one in which the producer partners with the participant to
co-create the experience. Remember, participants are actors in this
drama.
   This point was made clearer to Bob in spring 2018 when he and his wife
took their two grandchildren to a dude ranch in Arizona. They had visited
the dude ranch eight years earlier with their other two grandchildren. For
their previous trip they had purchased western gear, including boots,
cowboy hats, and clothes, to wear at the ranch. Most of the other guests
during their initial ranch visit also wore western gear. But this time the
experience felt different. Although the activities (e.g., horseback riding,
skeet shooting) were still western themed, fewer guests wore western
garb, opting instead for canvas shoes, tee shirts, and baseball caps. Since
many of the guests did not play their part in this unfolding western
drama, the experience seemed less authentic. Experience designers need
to be aware of the role they want participants to play and clearly
communicate these expectations.
   Comparing experience staging to theatrical staging may create some
operational misconceptions. For example, theater arts include set design,
costume design, lighting design, being a playwright or perhaps a director.
But all these are focused on producing something for a participant to
spectate, not to participate in. The analogy with experience design is
complete only if you think of participants as the actors who have a partial
script and thus to varying degrees participate in determining interactions
and outcomes.
   Ultimately, the participant is a partner with the experience designer
when the experience is staged, and this role needs to be anticipated and
accommodated in the experience design. Compared to service production,
experience staging is a more complicated and risky process. When a
designed experience is staged, the designer does not remain in complete
control of the production process because participants also play an active
role. They are actors who can improvise the script as the event unfolds. A
service is delivered in real time; an experience is co-created in real time.
                        Summary: Is It Worth It?

You may be thinking, “So, to design quality experiences I have to engage
people’s attention and meet their most important needs? This sounds
complicated.” Well, it is, sort of. It does require a systematic, intentional
approach and an understanding of the social psychology of experiences
reviewed in this chapter. You can’t simply throw an experience together
and have it consistently produce results of importance to you and your
participants. Too often experiences are cobbled together as the
experience is produced with no intentional planning. Luckily, this book is
dedicated to providing you with a set of tools to intentionally and
effectively design great experiences.
   People want and need great experiences, but to provide them you have
to design experiences that can capture people’s attention. Research from a
variety of disciplines gives some excellent insights into what makes a
great experience. Such an experience includes our innate need for the
right amount of stimulus—not too little and not too much. We also need to
feel autonomous, competent, and connected to people around us. We want
to experience things that elicit positive emotions, build relationships,
develop skills, connect us to desirable networks of ideas and people larger
than ourselves, and provide us with a sense of meaning and purpose.
Everyone is looking for these types of experiences. Are you ready to
design them?
   In the next chapter you’ll learn that experience is an expansive concept
used to describe many different engagements. To put this in perspective,
we have developed a framework that identifies the causal elements and
resultant outcomes of different types of experiences. This framework will
enable you to design macroexperiences that include intentional sequences
of different types of experiences to produce your intentionally targeted
outcomes.
                             CHAPTER THREE




   A Framework of Experience Types


HOW WOULD YOU categorize the different experiences you have each
day? Some are mundane, like taking out the trash; others are more
memorable, like attending a special dining event where you eat your food
in complete darkness, thus narrowing the sensory experience down to
taste and smell. While all experiences share some common characteristics
(e.g., multiple phased, requiring attention, based on perceptions), unique
qualities distinguish certain experiences from others. In this chapter, we
introduce a framework of experience types to help you differentiate
between and intentionally design them. Before we get to the framework,
though, we need to discuss briefly the important connection between
consciousness and experiences.
   The philosopher George Berkeley purportedly was the first to pose the
question, “If a tree in a forest falls and no one is around to hear it, does it
make a sound?” According to quantum mechanics, it doesn’t. The authors
of a 2018 Scientific American article entitled “Coming to Grips with
Quantum Mechanics” make the following claim about perceived reality:
   According to QM [quantum mechanics], the world exists only as a
   cloud of simultaneous, overlapping possibilities—technically called a
   “superposition”—until an observation brings one of these
   possibilities into focus in the form of definite objects and events.
   This transition is technically called a “measurement.” One of the
   keys to our argument for a mental world is the contention that only
   conscious observers can perform measurements.1

When observers become conscious of an object or event, they “measure”
or take note of it; thus, for something to exist it must be consciously
measured, or it doesn’t exist. To further support their argument, the
authors quote the German theoretical physicist Max Planck, who said: “I
regard consciousness as fundamental. I regard matter as derivative from
consciousness. We cannot get behind consciousness.”2 Becoming aware of
or being conscious of an object or event is its origin. It is interesting that
this notion is also a fundamental tenet of the sociological theory of
symbolic interaction—namely, that the meaning of objects derives from
our interactions with them.
   Thus, consciousness and the interactions inherent to achieving it are
fundamental to understanding how we relate to the world we know. In the
previous chapter we cited a number of social psychologists who have
studied consciousness, also called “awareness” and “attention directing.”
Although consciousness is fundamental, there are varying degrees of
consciousness; these varying degrees of attention and resulting variations
of engagement with objects and events influence the intensity of the
resulting experience. This variation provides a continuum of
consciousness that is the underlying structure for the experience
framework we present in this chapter.
                            The Framework

Our framework consists of the following five experience types: prosaic,
mindful, memorable, meaningful, and transformational. Types are defined
by their key characteristic as well as by the five attributes that form a
continuum across the framework. Starting with experiences that are
mindful, the key characteristics are cumulative; in other words, they build
on each other as you move across types. For example, the key
characteristic of memorable experiences, emotion, is also found in
meaningful experiences along with its unique characteristic, discovery. In
presenting each experience type, we’ll first identify its name, define its
key characteristic, and then discuss the attributes that determine the
experience type’s placement within the framework.


                          Prosaic Experiences

Unless you have abilities of observation and memory recall like Sherlock
Holmes, you probably don’t remember the color of the toothbrush you
had three years ago. This lack of recall is not because you didn’t have
adequate opportunities to interact with your toothbrush and memorize its
color. You had been using it several times a day, we hope, for multiple
months. The real issue is that the experience of brushing your teeth is
routine and forgettable. Your brain goes into autopilot as you move
through your familiar teeth-brushing routine, and you don’t take the time
to think, “Wow, my toothbrush is orange with white stripes down the side.
I’m going to remember this toothbrush forever.”
   John Dewey, the renowned psychologist and educational reformer,
described these types of occurrences as “prosaic experiences.”3 Merriam-
Webster defines prosaic as “everyday, ordinary.”4 Most of the experiences
we have each day are prosaic. They happen in Daniel Kahneman’s system 1
thinking.5 And guess what? That’s okay; in fact, it’s a good thing. Just
think, if every experience you had each day required your full attention
and stimulated every sense, you’d be exhausted before even leaving your
house for work. Kahneman documents that our brains are lazy and
reluctant to invest more effort than necessary;6 that’s why they shift into
autopilot during prosaic experiences. This autopilot mode is the key
characteristic of prosaic experiences.
   As an experience designer, you need to recognize the importance of
intentionally designing prosaic experiences. These experiences are a
necessary part of an experience journey but not ones you design for
participants to remember. In fact, well-designed prosaic experiences help
end users avoid negative memorable experiences because they eliminate
touchpoints that consume mental energy unnecessarily. For example,
when Mat visits his dentist, he parks in an attached parking structure
adjacent to the building where the dentist’s office is located. Recognizing
that it’s easy to lose track of which parking level corresponds to the
office’s building level, especially for patrons who visit the office only once
or twice a year, Mat’s dentist has placed signs on each level of the parking
structure to guide patrons up to the correct level. This simple
intervention ensures that the parking experience becomes prosaic after
the first visit as opposed to becoming a negative memorable one at each
six-month checkup. Although parking has nothing to do with dentistry, it
has everything to do with the dental patron experience.


                          Mindful Experiences

Prosaic experiences become mindful experiences when they cause us to
shift out of mental autopilot mode and engage in effortful mental activity.
In doing this we shift from fast (system 1) to slow (system 2) thinking.7
Dewey explained that the difference between mindful experiences and
prosaic experiences is that during a mindful experience something
catches our attention and cues our brain to shift out of autopilot to figure
out what’s going on.8 Kahneman’s work indicates that a function of
system 1 activity is to assess what is going on in one’s environment and
determine if there is a need to shift to system 2 thinking.9 The act of
effortful thinking may be momentary or sustained; but as soon you
engage in slow thinking, you shift from a prosaic to a mindful experience.
For example, you may be walking from the subway station to your office
building, a path you take every day, when you notice that the sidewalk you
usually take is blocked for construction. You must now think about
alternate routes and select one. You have learned a new route to work. It
may even be better than your habitual route!
   Effortful mental activity, therefore, is the key characteristic of mindful
experiences. You are no longer passively moving through a rote routine;
you have moved into system 2 thinking. Producing a mindful experience
requires, at a minimum, an interruption of a prosaic experience. You need
to get people’s attention if you want them to break from their habitual,
prosaic response. Bill Nye the Science Guy introduced the notion of the
ABCs of teaching: action before content.10 Action is the norm-breaking,
attention-getting device used to create a teachable moment.
   Let’s consider the case of the airline flight-safety briefing. How could
you apply Bill Nye’s approach and place action before content to turn this
traditionally prosaic experience (we know most of you zone out during
this part of the flight) into a mindful one? Any ideas? If you’ve flown
enough, you’ve probably noticed creativity emerging in the flight-safety-
briefing experience with some airlines. Southwest Airlines has used
humor for quite a while to catch people’s attention during their safety
talks. More recently, several different airlines, including Delta, Air New
Zealand, and Virgin America, have produced some clever and humorous
videos designed to catch people’s attention in order to entertain and
inform.11 If effortful mental activity occurs, an experience is no longer
prosaic. You may also think further or more intently and feel emotional
intensity as you engage in system 2 thinking, thereby transitioning a
mindful experience into something else entirely.


                          Memorable Experiences

We’re going to ask you to engage in a short exercise. Take out a pen or
pencil and list ten of your most memorable experiences in the space
provided in this section. If you are one of those people who like to keep
their books undefiled, you can use a separate sheet of paper.

   1.   ______________________________________________
   2.   ______________________________________________
   3.   ______________________________________________
   4.   ______________________________________________
   5.   ______________________________________________
   6.   ______________________________________________
   7.   ______________________________________________
   8.   ______________________________________________
   9.   ______________________________________________
  10.   ______________________________________________

What makes these experiences stand out in your memory? Do they share a
commonality? Mindful that you can probably think of a variety of answers
to these questions, we’d like to suggest that emotions are a key
characteristic of all memorable experiences. If you look back at your list,
you can probably distinctly remember the emotions involved with each
one.
   Emotions change mindful experiences into memorable ones. Consider
the following example: As a river guide, Mat floated the same sections of
the rivers he worked on numerous times. Because of the repetition
involved, he does not remember the specific details of each trip, but he
can recall experiences on the river associated with emotions: the thrill of
running a particularly technical section for the first time, fear when a
boat flipped or someone fell out during a rapid, contentment sitting
around the campfire with a particularly tight-knit group of guests.
Experiences on the river that didn’t produce emotions have faded into the
background.
   The connection between emotions and memories is also supported by
the work of Kahneman and his colleagues. Their work suggests that we
remember experiences in the moment and after they occur differently.12
Even though we evaluate an experience moment to moment as it’s
occurring, when we reflect on an experience we tend to remember peaks,
pits, and ends of experiences.13 This principle is often referred to as the
“peak end rule.” Those moments of the experience that produce the
strongest emotions also produce the strongest memories. This is why Dan
and Chip Heath argue that “you do not need to obsess over every detail” of
an experience as long as you incorporate memorable peaks and ends.14
   Although you usually want to design experiences that elicit positive
emotions, you also need to have strategies in place to address negative
emotions when they occur. As an experience designer, you must
manipulate cues to facilitate the recall of positive emotions and memories.
But you must also make certain the cues do not lead to the recall of
negative memories. For example, Disney theme parks have an intentional
plan in place for instances when a child gets lost.15 The plan involves the
coordinated efforts of cast members across the park as well as a lost-child
center with books, games, and videos to occupy children until their
parents are located. Cast members are trained to comfort and reassure
both lost children and their parents. The parks have a very high success
rate of quickly reuniting families, all without ever having to rely on
making public lost-child announcements. They work intentionally with a
predetermined plan to turn a negative experience into a positive one as
quickly as possible by controlling the emotions of the child and parents, as
well as by having a plan to quickly reunite them.
   You can never fully design away bad experiences; they are going to
happen. Part of an experience design process should include speculative
forecasting about things that may go wrong and the response that will be
provided if they do. This approach can be taken to unrealistic extremes, of
course, but understanding human nature will lead you to a reasonable and
probable list. Fortunately, experiences that initially produce negative
emotions can serve as opportunities to proactively correct experience
failures. Research even suggests that the best services often start as bad
experiences that were then intentionally addressed and fixed by the
provider.16 You can probably think of personal examples of bad
experiences transformed into good ones because an individual or
organization took quick corrective actions and instituted a good recovery.


                        Meaningful Experiences

Memorable and meaningful experiences have a lot in common. System 2
thinking and emotions are common characteristics of each type. The key
characteristic that differentiates a meaningful experience from a
memorable one is discovery. Meaningful experiences teach us something
about ourselves or expand our knowledge about the world. Look back at
your list of ten memorable experiences. We wouldn’t be surprised if they
involved discovery of something new. Meaningful experiences are
important because they serve as the building blocks of your personal
identity and worldview. They represent times when we learn things that
matter to us: a new insight about ourselves, a new fact we believe
important, or a new insight about a previously held point of view.
   Designing meaningful experiences is more difficult than designing the
other experience types we’ve discussed so far. Meaningful experiences are
often the result of co-creation in which participants play an active
engaged role in the experience. Martin Seligman suggests that “we want
to be entitled to our positive feelings.”17 In other words, we want to have
played a part in acquiring positive feelings for our experiences to be truly
meaningful. Co-creation facilitates this desire.
   Participants also need time during an experience to reflect on the
meaning of what has occurred and its personal implications. Our
professional experience suggests that this is further enhanced when
individuals are given the opportunity to share memorable experiences
with other people who are important to them and when the experience
includes opportunities for personal reflection. When designing
meaningful experiences, you should intentionally find ways to make them
shared and provide space for individual and group reflection. You don’t
need to structure every moment of an experience with active
engagements. Personal reflective engagements are engagements too!
Remember our discussion in chapter 2 about autonomy as a basic
psychological need. Sometimes the right amount of unstructured time,
time for reflection about what has occurred, can enhance feelings of
autonomy and move an experience from memorable to meaningful.
   We should mention here that not all discovery, or learning, occurs as a
result of meaningful experiences. Much, if not most, learning arises out of
mindful experiences. Rote memorization of facts and figures seldom
elicits emotion or discovery. Learning that sticks with you, though, that’s a
different story. Recall some of the most influential teachers in your life,
and we wager they provided meaningful experiences ripe with emotion
and discovery. In fact, they probably even provided you with
transformational experiences as well.


                    Transformational Experiences

Over the course of your life, certain experiences will have a profound
effect on the individual you are. These types of experiences are
infrequent, and often we don’t immediately recognize their profundity.
This is because transformational experiences lead directly to personal
changes born out of the experience. For example, an individual has a heart
attack and, fortunately, survives. Because of this, that person experiences
a shift in perspective about life and about attitudes regarding health and
exercise. These attitudinal changes lead to dramatic behavioral
adjustments related to the person’s diet and exercise. Sustained over time,
this behavior changes the person, who has thus become transformed
because of the heart attack. It’s important here to note that
transformational experiences contain all the characteristics associated
with the nonprosaic experience types reviewed thus far: reflection,
emotion, and discovery. The new, key characteristic is significant change.
Were any of the memorable experiences you noted on your list
transformational? If any of them led to perspective, attitude, or behavior
changes, then they were.
   It also deserves noting that within a transformational experience, there
are usually one or two distinctly transformative microexperiences
(remember the peak-end rule!) that make the entire macroexperience
transformational. Consider Charles Dickens’s timeless tale of the
transformation of Ebenezer Scrooge.18 His is a story of transformative
encounters that cause Scrooge to dramatically change his behavior: seeing
his younger self choose money over love with the Ghost of Christmas Past,
or having the Ghost of Christmas Yet-to-Come show him Tiny Tim’s family
mourning Tim’s passing. Because of his ghostly peak experiences, he
proclaims, “I will honour Christmas in my heart, and try to keep it all the
year. I will live in the Past, the Present, and the Future. The Spirits of all
Three shall strive within me. I will not shut out the lessons that they
teach!”19 Scrooge’s experience is transformational because he becomes a
new man, and as the narrator confirms, “Scrooge was better than his
word. He did it all, and infinitely more.”20
   Transformational experiences also vary by degree according to the
type and duration of the change. Consider, for example, a hypothetical
story of different individuals who watched the same TED Talk about
nutrition. One person experiences a shift in her attitude regarding the
consumption of processed foods but not enough to change her behavior.
Another person has an attitude change about his nutrition and decides to
give up sugar—but the resolution lasts for only one week. A third person
who watches the TED Talk has a more lasting transformational experience
that sets her on a path to becoming a professional triathlete.


                  Summarizing the Experience Types

The framework consists of five experience types and their associated key
characteristics: prosaic (autopilot), mindful (effortful mental
engagement), memorable (emotion), meaningful (discovery), and
transformational (change) (see figure 3.1). Each characteristic, starting
with effortful mental engagement, provides a foundation for subsequent
higher-order experiences. Going forward, we’ll refer to memorable,
meaningful, and transformational experiences as “higher-order
experiences” because they require additional personal investment when
compared with prosaic and mindful experiences.




Figure 3.1 Experience types and key characteristics.




                                  Experience Attributes

Five attributes determine the order of experience types within the
framework. These attributes also help indicate differences between
experiences (e.g., somewhat memorable versus very memorable) within
specific types. The attributes are frequency and impact, novelty,
engagement, required energy, and results.


                        Attribute 1: Frequency and Impact

During your lifetime, you will experience exponentially more prosaic than
transformational experiences. In fact, the frequency of experiences
decreases as you move from left to right across the framework. As Jenkins
Lloyd Jones put it, “Life is like an old-time rail journey—delays, sidetracks,
smoke, dust, cinders, and jolts, interspersed only occasionally by beautiful
vistas and thrilling bursts of speed.”21 We all know that we are going to
have a greater number of forgettable experiences than life-altering ones,
but when it comes to experience design, too often the aspiration is that all
experiences be transformational.
   We believe that it’s a bit unrealistic, as well as ineffective, to aim to
design only transformational experiences. It’s okay to design meaningful,
memorable, mindful, and, yes, even prosaic experiences. People don’t
always want transformational experiences. When you go grocery
shopping, you’re not expecting or even desiring to have a life-changing
experience. You want the process to be filled primarily with smooth
prosaic and mindful experiences, perhaps with a few memorable ones
thrown in for good measure. A master experience designer knows how to
weave all experience types together to create a well-composed, positive
macroexperience that meets or exceeds participants’ expectations.
   It is important to also note the inverse relationship of frequency and
impact (see figure 3.2). It’s the less frequent experiences that have the
greatest potential effect, both negative and positive. As we move across
the framework, the potential effect of experience results increases. In fact,
the nature of potential results changes as well, which is a topic we’ll
address a bit later in the chapter.




Figure 3.2 Experience frequencies and impacts.


   As an experience designer, you need to recognize that the stakes
increase as you create higher-order experiences. The payoff, in terms of
results, of a well-designed prosaic experience is much less than the effect
of a meaningful, memorable, or transformational one. At the same time,
the potential for higher-magnitude negative experience results also
increases as you move from left to right across the framework. In this
regard, experience design can be compared to walking an inclined
tightrope, with each experience type representing an increase in the
height of the rope above the ground: greater risk, greater reward. Higher-
order experiences require increased levels of participant buy-in. If you
think back to the key characteristics, you can see that by the time
someone has a transformational experience, that person has invested
attention, emotions, identity, attitudes, and behaviors into the experience.
   These investments are more likely to occur when participants co-create
the experience with the provider, a topic we’ll devote more attention to
later. One-time or nonparticipatory experiences do not usually lead to
repeat engagement or to the development of lifetime pursuits. These
types of experiences are usually not engaging enough to produce long-
term effects or participation; they are not sustainable. This doesn’t mean
that entertainment and one-time events can’t produce high levels of
engagement, but accomplishing these levels requires special design
attention to create higher-order experiences in which participants
become engaged actors as opposed to passive spectators.


                          Attribute 2: Novelty

The degree of novelty is obviously closely linked with frequency. Prosaic
experiences are usually less novel than transformational ones (see figure
3.3). The more we experience something, the less we tend to pay attention
to it (i.e., we employ system 1 thinking). This is why experiences can
change types over time with repeated participation. Novelty plays a key
role in determining where experiences fall within the framework because
its introduction encourages system 2 thinking. A little bit of novelty
infused into even a prosaic experience can transform it into a different
type of experience. Let’s return to our earlier teeth-brushing example.
Imagine you receive a fancy electric toothbrush. The usually prosaic
experience of brushing your teeth now becomes mindful and perhaps
even memorable. Teeth-brushing is suddenly novel and fun. Well, at least
for a while. Novelty allows you to attract individuals’ attention but the
experience their attention is directed towards must also provide
opportunities to feel, learn, and/or change or they will quickly lose
interest. Novelty always has a point of diminishing return.




Figure 3.3 Experience novelty.


   Michael Eysenck coined the term hedonic treadmill, based on thinking
that goes back hundreds of years, to describe the process whereby
individuals return to a baseline psychological state after positive or
negative experiences occur in their lives.22 A classic hedonic treadmill
example is the effect of winning the lottery. In a study published in the
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, researchers found that lottery
winners in their sample were not significantly happier than nonwinners.23
Although winning the lottery is very exciting initially, winners tend to
return to their previous level of happiness after the novelty wears off.
   Although novelty can be an important tool for experience designers, it
works only when applied sparingly and complimented by well-designed
experiences. As Steve Diller, Nathan Shedroff, and Darrel Rhea note, “For
companies to achieve enduring competitive advantage through
experience design, their innovations cannot be based simply on novelty.”24
If you rely solely on novelty to engage people in the experiences you
design, you will be caught on the hedonic treadmill yourself, always
having to find new ways to infuse novelty into your experience designs.
Event designers often fall into this trap. They use a “wow” factor to end an
event, which forces the need to create an even bigger “wow” for the next
event. Novelty can be a useful experience design strategy, but it should be
used judiciously and holistically.


                       Attribute 3: Engagement

Each experience type requires a different degree of participant
engagement. Because the concept of engagement is abstract, we want to
introduce some theoretical perspectives that should help you think more
concretely about engagement. The first perspective is symbolic
interaction theory, which was first developed by Herbert Blumer, based on
the work of George Herbert Mead and others.25 The basic idea of symbolic
interactionism is that we assign meaning to the world around us as we
interact with it. In other words, things have no specific meaning until we
give them meaning through our interactions with them. Think of the logo
of your favorite sports team. Now think of the logo of your favorite team’s
rival. The meanings you associate with each logo are built on interactions
(i.e., experiences) you have had with those teams. The logos themselves
are meaningless, but for fans of those teams they symbolically represent a
host of experiences, emotions, and behaviors. This is symbolic
interactionism in action.
    What does this have to do with experience design? In a previous book,
Bob and his coauthor Barbara Schlatter introduced a three-phase model
(see figure 3.4), based on symbolic interaction theory, to describe how
individuals engage in experiences.26 During intake, the first phase,
individuals become consciously aware of what is occurring in the
experience. In phase 2, individuals begin to think more actively about the
experience, process what is occurring, and may plan various options for
responding. In the third and final phase, individuals respond and engage
in co-creative actions that help sustain the experience. When individuals
enter this third phase, they truly become participants. They introduce
new touchpoints and elements that sustain interactions. Once the
interactions introduced are resolved, conscious attention may shift back
to the intake phase, thus beginning the cycle anew. Some experiences
move participants through all three phases, whereas others may not even
bring people into phase 1. Experiences with high affordance, which
present multiple options for engagement, are more likely to be sustained,
higher-order experiences. This is another way of modeling the difference
between a service and an engaged experience. A service ends at phase 2
because participants are not provided options for engaging in and
sustaining the experience.27




Figure 3.4 Action cycle. Reprinted with Permission. J. Robert Rossman and Barbara E. Schlatter,
Recreation Programming: Designing and Staging Leisure Experiences, 7th ed. (Urbana, IL: Sagamore,
2015), 29.
   Have you ever fallen asleep in a movie? If so, you know what it’s like
when an experience can’t even keep you in phase 1 engagement. On the
other hand, have you ever watched a movie that has captivated you to the
point where you have considered engaging in new behaviors (i.e., phase
3)? It’s easy to recognize the effect of movies that facilitate phase 3
engagement. Take, for example, the behavior trends associated with the
following movies:

  •   Back to the Future—increases in skateboard sales
  •   Twilight series—increases in vampire-teeth dental implants
  •   Hunger Games series—increases in archery participation
  •   Sideways—increased interest in pinot noir wine

Another example: each year millions of people attend Comic Con events
all over the world to dress up and engage in activities associated with
their favorite movies. This is indicative of phase 3 engagement.
   Some definite parallels exist between the three-phase engagement
model and Kahneman’s system 1 and system 2 thinking. Phase 1
engagement is indicative of system 1 thinking, in which mental
functioning is primarily on autopilot and reflection or deep thinking is
limited. As you move into phase 2 and phase 3 levels of engagement, you
also shift into system 2 thinking, which involves more intentional mental
processes. Accordingly, higher levels of engagement and thinking are also
associated with higher-order experiences (see figure 3.5).
   Receiving a service provision, engaging in most entertainment
offerings, and being a spectator are experiences that often end at phase 2
because no response from the recipient, audience, or spectator is required
or allowed. These experiences are essentially passive. While this is fine
some of the time, people also want phase 3 experiences in their lives. As
companies have increasingly realized the importance of providing well-
designed experiences, consumers’ expectations for great experiences have
increased. The world-famous Harlem Globetrotters realize this. Their
main offering is a passive spectated show. However, they now offer a
preperformance attraction marketed as the Magic Pass©: “Score more fun
when you upgrade your game experience with Magic Pass presented by
Tum-e Yummies, a 30-minute interactive event!”28
   It is often the case that phase 1 and phase 2 experiences don’t suffice.
Richard Florida, writing about creative, well-educated individuals in The
Rise of the Creative Class, comments, “They crave creative stimulation but
not escape [;] … members of the Creative Class prefer more active,
authentic, and participatory experiences, which they can have a hand in
structuring.”29 Sounds like they want to engage in co-creative
experiences!




Figure 3.5 Experience engagement.



                           Attribute 4: Required Energy

Listening to advertisements today, you would think that higher-order
experiences are widely available. Advertisers entice us with wonderful
experiences of all kinds: purchasing experiences, ownership experiences,
car service experiences, travel experiences, dining experiences, and so on.
This barrage can make consumers feel that if they aren’t having one
amazing experience after another, they’re missing out. And it can make an
experience designer feel as if every microexperience needs to be an
amazing, higher-order experience. This attitude, from both the
participant and the designer perspective, is an illusion. You don’t need to
have or deliver a constant stream of higher-order experiences. A steady
diet of higher-order experiences would be exhausting because these
experiences require significant amounts of emotional and mental energy,
both of which are exhaustible resources (see figure 3.6).
    Every experience has an emotional, mental, and physical price tag, the
“cost” of participating in the experience. Think of recent higher-order
experiences you have had. We guess they required more personal energy
investment than prosaic or mindful experiences. Often after a higher-
order experience you need downtime to process what just happened. If
you were to participate in one higher-order experiences after another, you
would never have time for processing.
    In some of his research, Mat has looked at the effect study abroad
experiences have on adolescents.30 Spending time internationally—
interacting with foreign cultures and having a host of new experiences—is
often a memorable, meaningful, and even transformational experience. It
is interesting that some participants in Mat’s research expressed a desire
for more time to reflect on the experiences they were having. Sometimes,
in an effort to experience as much as possible during their travels, the
interviewed students appeared to lose the ability to adequately process
their experiences, and thereby they potentially missed out on recognizing
the full effect these experiences had on their lives. This kind of disconnect
might keep a memorable experience from becoming a meaningful one
because time isn’t provided for reflective discovery.
Figure 3.6 Energy required across experience types.


   As we have already discussed, higher-order experiences happen only
when individuals recognize and intentionally engage in what is happening
around them. In her book The Managed Heart, Arlie Hochschild proposes a
concept she calls “emotional labor,” defined as “the management of
feeling to create a publicly observable facial and bodily display; emotional
labor is sold for a wage and therefore has an exchange value.”31
Hochschild goes on to suggest that “there is a cost to emotional work: it
affects the degree to which we listen to feeling and sometimes our very
capacity to feel.”32
   Experience designers need to recognize that some experiences require
more energy than others and that some restore energy. Lessons along this
line can be gleaned from the organizational behavior literature’s recent
interest in energy management. Although Steven Covey and others kicked
off the time management movement decades ago, a growing awareness
exists of the need for not only time management but also energy
management. In a 2007 Harvard Business Review article titled “Manage Your
Energy, Not Your Time,” Tony Schwartz and Catherine McCarthy share the
following advice to organizations that are attempting to maximize the
effectiveness of their workforce:

   To effectively re-energize their workforces, organizations need to
   shift their emphasis from getting more out of people to investing
  more in them, so they are motivated—and able—to bring more of
  themselves to work every day. To recharge themselves, individuals
  need to recognize the costs of energy-depleting behaviors and then
  take responsibility for changing them, regardless of the
  circumstances they’re facing.33

Schwartz and McCarthy go on to share data from studies they have
conducted at large organizations, data that show a positive link between
effective employee energy management practices (e.g., better sleep
patterns, healthy eating, short breaks) and increases in employee-
generated revenue.
   Be aware of the energy requirements of the experiences you design. In
the same way a composer uses various tempos, tones, and instruments to
create a symphony, the best experience designers employ a variety of
microexperience types within the macroexperiences they design for
participants. You have multiple keys on your experience design keyboard;
make sure you use them all.


                         Attribute 5: Results

As previously noted, good experience design requires intentionally
targeting specific results. To do this, you need to know what types of
results you want your experiences to produce, types we hope have been
derived from what your targeted participants need and want. It is equally
important to understand the link between experience types and results.
Too often, unrealistic claims are made about the results associated with
the experiences provided. Do not fall into the trap of becoming an
experience design snake-oil salesperson. David Meerman Scott argues that
individuals want honest, fact-based information about what you offer, not
an “egocentric display.”34 If we overstate the nature of the results our
experiences provide, we are setting up our end users for disappointment.
We need to recognize the link between specific experience types and
specific result types. The question then becomes, Which outcomes are
associated with which experience types?
   Martin E. P. Seligman’s work offers a potential answer to this question.
In his book Authentic Happiness, Seligman discusses the nuanced though
extremely important difference between two categories of positive results
that stem from experiences: pleasure and gratification. He describes
pleasures as having “clear sensory and strong emotional components …
[that] are evanescent, and they involve little, if any, thinking.”35
Gratifications, in contrast, arise when experiences “engage us fully,
[when] we become immersed and absorbed in them, and we lose self-
consciousness.”36 Consider, as a concrete example, the different results
associated with eating a donut versus helping someone in need. The first
experience, according to Seligman, would produce pleasure, and the
second, gratification.
   Seligman makes a further distinction between bodily pleasures and
higher pleasures. Bodily pleasures “are immediate, come through the
senses, and are momentary.”37 Higher pleasures share many features in
common with bodily pleasures but, Seligman notes, are also “considerably
more complex in what sets them off externally. They are more cognitive,
and they are also more numerous and more varied than the bodily
pleasures.”38 He further classifies higher pleasures by their degree of
intensity from low intensity (e.g., comfort and harmony) to high intensity
(e.g., rapture and euphoria).
   Gratifications are a bit more difficult than pleasures to conceptually pin
down. Seligman observes:
  When I press people about the positive emotion of pleasure we
  allegedly feel when serving coffee to the homeless, or reading
  Andrea Barrett, or playing bridge or rock climbing, it is quite
  elusive…. It is the total absorption, the suspension of consciousness,
  and the flow that the gratifications produce that defines liking these
  activities—not the presence of pleasure.39

Think about our discussion of flow theory in chapter 2, and think about
the flow-inducing experiences you’ve had. Those are examples of times
when you’ve experienced gratification.
   Let’s return to thinking about experience types and results. Seligman’s
ideas about pleasures and gratifications map very nicely onto the
framework (see figure 3.7). As we’ve previously noted, higher-order
experiences are built on the characteristics and attributes of their lower-
order cousins. In other words, memorable experiences involve reflection
and emotion, whereas meaningful experiences involve reflection,
emotion, and discovery. We use the same cumulative logic when thinking
about experience result types. Accordingly, we propose that all experience
types can produce bodily pleasures. Higher pleasures, though, are
associated only with mindful and higher-order experience types.
Meaningful and transformative experiences are the sole domain of
gratifications. Seligman further notes that

  [gratification] cannot be derived from bodily pleasure, nor is it a
  state that can be chemically induced or attained by any shortcuts. It
  can only be had by activity consonant with noble purpose…. The
  pleasures are about the senses and the emotions. The gratifications,
  in contrast, are about enacting personal strengths and virtues.40
Figure 3.7 Experience and result types.


Because gratifications are so closely linked with personal strengths and
virtues, it’s also important to recognize that these results are more likely
to come about from active co-creation between designers and
participants.


                                 Framework + Attributes

So, there you have it. Five experience types and five attributes (see figure
3.8). We don’t expect this framework in its current form to be the final
word on experience types, but we at least hope to provide a usable,
actionable framework to guide current practice and to promote further
conversation. The experience type framework demonstrates the
psychological underpinning to experiences that has not been fully
explored and utilized in others’ writings about experiences. We believe
experience and experience design are better understood when anchored
in this psychological literature.
Figure 3.8 A framework of experience types.


    The information included was further informed by our own work in
designing experiences. The framework will help you develop a richer
understanding of the nature of experience types and the things you need
to consider when designing them. Each experience type is classified by its
defining characteristic: prosaic, autopilot; mindful, effortful mental
engagement; memorable, emotion; meaningful, discovery; and
transformational, change. Lower-order experiences occur more frequently
than higher-order experiences, but the potential magnitude of impact
increases as you move from left to right across the framework. Novelty is
most often a one-time, attention-getting bump that can initially capture
individuals’ awareness enough for a higher-order experience to occur if
the experience also offers opportunities to feel, learn, and/or change.
Higher-order experiences require more intense cognitive engagement
(i.e., system 2 thinking and phase 2 reflective cognition and phase 3
intentional action). Because of these demands, higher-order experiences
also require more energy. Finally, all experience types can produce bodily
pleasures, whereas higher pleasures occur only in mindful and other
higher-order experiences. Meaningful and transformational experiences
are the domains of gratifications.
   Before wrapping up this chapter, we want to provide an example of
how the framework can help you classify, deconstruct, and design
experiences. We also need to briefly discuss the role that time plays in all
this. Let’s first look at the framework in action.
   Using a variety of experience types adds peaks and valleys. Let’s return
to the restaurant example we used in chapter 1, where we broke down the
macroexperience into its microexperiences. We can use the framework to
classify each of the microexperiences into one of the five types. This
process allows you as an experience designer to have a much clearer
picture and richer understanding of the macroexperience of visiting a
restaurant. You can critically analyze the sequence, flow, and frequency of
different experience types to better orchestrate the macroexperience.
Perhaps you are devoting too many resources to making some
microexperiences memorable when they should be simply prosaic. It is
also possible there are microexperiences that could easily be moved from
mindful to memorable.
   When you identify a microexperience you want to shift from mindful to
memorable, use the framework as a guide to make sure you’re including
the necessary characteristics and attributes of memorable experiences in
your design. For example, you decide that you want to make the menu-
reading experience more than just a chance to learn what’s available and
how much it costs. You could then brainstorm ways to make reading the
menu a more emotional experience. Potential ideas include sprinkling
tongue-in-cheek jokes throughout the menu to induce humor, adding
riddles to produce feelings of accomplishment, or using a theme to
connect readers to emotionally rich memories like holiday traditions or
historical eras. In later chapters, we’ll discuss in depth how to use design
thinking to brainstorm and prototype new experience ideas and how to
infuse artistic elements like themes into the design process. For now, we
hope these examples of the framework in practice give you a sense of its
utility.
   Keep in mind that time can change one’s perspective of experience
types. The categorization of any experience you have is fluid because your
perceptions of a completed experience can change over time. We’ve
already noted that transformational experiences are often recognized as
such not in the moment but later, after recognition of the resulting
changes arises. Other experiences that may initially be memorable,
meaningful, or even transformative may become prosaic over time with
repetition. Consider your first day at a new job. It was probably a
memorable experience—everything was new and exciting. As time went
on and things became more routine, going to work each day became a
mindful or prosaic experience.
   It is interesting research shows that prosaic experiences can transform
into higher-order experiences over time. Evidence for this was recently
shown through a study conducted by Ting Zhang at Harvard in which
participants wrote about some personal, yet ordinary life events.41 Seven
months later they read these descriptions again. Many of the participants
were surprised at how meaningful these mundane reflections became over
time. As one participant noted, “Re-reading this event of doing mundane
stuff with my daughter has certainly brightened my day. I’m glad I chose
that event to write about because of the incredible joy it gives me at this
moment.”42 Mundane had become meaningful. The authors also note that
the ease of recording and sharing immediate memories through social
media may dampen this ripening effect because the focus becomes
entirely on the act of documenting, with little time given to reflection.
They suggest that “future research should explore the optimal balance
between enjoying the present as it unfolds and documenting the present
to enjoy it in the future.”43


            Summary: Differentiating Experience Types

In this chapter we have moved from discussing experience broadly to
discussing specific experience types. We have proposed and defined five
types of experiences, each of which has different defining characteristics
and attributes. The framework can help guide how you think about the
different types of microexperiences you can use in composing each
macroexperience. Paying attention to the details of each microexperience
will help you to better orchestrate the overall macroexperience. We have
also identified attributes associated with each experience type. You should
think of these characteristics and attributes as possible ingredients for
designing each specific type of experience. Knowing how various
attributes contribute to each type and the degree to which they do so is
useful for keeping design and staging efforts focused on delivering the
intended microexperience to your end users. Next we turn our attention
to the key elements of all experiences, the building blocks you will use to
orchestrate experiences. These will be foundational elements for the
experiences you will design.
                               PART TWO




   The Experience Designer’s Toolkit


ALTHOUGH THE TOPIC of experiences has received a lot of attention, how
to go about systematically designing experiences deserves further
examination. Our primary purpose in writing this book is to address this
point. Much of the extant literature extolls the virtues of experiences and
catalogues successful ones using case study examples. There is a process
we have been developing for twenty-five years that can be used to
intentionally design experiences. In this section we share it with you
along with complementary content from top design-thinking and
customer experience experts. This is a robust process that can be used to
design new experiences or deconstruct existing experiences so that they
can be improved. The following chapters introduce you to key topics you
will need to understand in order to successfully design experiences: the
experiencescape, design thinking, experience mapping, and touchpoint
templates.
                              CHAPTER FOUR




                 The Experiencescape


WHEN MAT AND his wife, Chenae, were shopping for a house before
moving to start a new job, their realtor sent them photos of a house in a
desirable neighborhood. In the backyard of the house stood a large granite
boulder that looked to be about six feet tall and six feet wide, a really large
rock. Although the rest of the yard was overgrown and could not be
clearly seen, both Mat and Chenae were intrigued by the thought of
having a backyard with a large boulder as a signature piece their kids
could climb and play on. They ended up buying this house and soon
thereafter started the process of landscaping the backyard.
   Although this was an exciting endeavor, it was also overwhelming.
Neither Mat nor Chenae had landscape design expertise. They had a sense
of what they wanted the yard to feel like, and both knew some basics
about plants and trees, but they were aware that there was a lot about
landscaping they knew little about. Luckily, they were referred to an up-
and-coming landscape design student from the university who used his
knowledge of the elements of landscaping to create an intentional and
practical design for their yard. With this design in hand, Mat and Chenae
could bring their hoped-for backyard to life, with the granite boulder as a
central feature (and, yes, their kids love playing on it).
   Just as creating a backyard plan felt daunting to Mat and Chenae
because they lacked an understanding of all the necessary elements of
landscape design, so too can experience design seem intimidating without
an understanding of the key elements of experiences. In chapter 1 we
defined experiences (remember our discussion of micro- and
macroexperiences?), but we didn’t explain a critical aspect of experience
design: the space in which experiences occur and the elements at play
within this space. So, where do experiences occur? Although
“everywhere” is technically correct, a designer needs more specificity. You
could also answer, “They occur in individuals’ minds,” but though
experiences are personally perceived, this also does not help you from a
design standpoint. We like what Tom O’Dell has said about where
experiences take place:

   The spaces in which experiences are staged and consumed can be
   likened to stylized landscapes: that are strategically planned, laid
   out and designed, … landscapes of experience—experiencescapes—
   that are not only organized by producers … but are also actively
   sought after by consumers.1

Notice the words O’Dell uses to describe the space where experiences
occur: strategically planned, laid out, designed, and organized. All these
words speak to the intentionality needed to create experience­scapes, a term
Bob started using in the 1990s to help people to think more concretely
about experience settings.2
   In the same way a landscape architect intentionally arranges elements
(e.g., irrigation, trees, shrubs, flowering plants, turf) to design landscapes,
experience designers intentionally arrange key elements to create
experiencescapes.3 An experiencescape provides individuals with a
structured environment in which they can engage in experiences. These
six elements make up a “situated activity system,”4 which is where the
interactions of an experience occur. Think of the experiencescape as a
stage and your participants as actors. You design the structure of the stage
using its key elements (e.g., lighting, set pieces, backdrops, music), and
then actors come onto the stage and interact with the structure in the
space you have created and with each other. This interaction between the
elements in this space and the actors in it is what creates the experience.
In this chapter we’re going to introduce and explain how to use key
experience elements to design experiencescapes.
   In a previous book, Bob worked with Barbara Schlatter to identify six
experience elements that have been used successfully for more than
twenty-five years to design leisure experiences.5 The work of other
scholars interested in experiences has continued to confirm the
applicability of the six elements.6 We believe these elements, with a few
adaptations, provide a starting point for defining the elements that are
applicable across all experiencescapes. In the next section, we introduce
our version of the six experiencescape elements and discuss their
relevance for experience design.


                   Elements of the Experiencescape

Experiencescapes are composed of six experience elements: people, place,
objects, rules, relationships, and blocking (see table 4.1 for more details).
Each of these is unique and important—so important that if one is altered,
the experience fundamentally changes. In every experience some
elements are more important than others, but each element must be
accounted for in an experience design. In some cases, one or more
elements may be determined before the design process begins; for
example, the people element may already have been determined (e.g., five-
to-six-year-olds are the predetermined participants for kindergarten
experiences). Although as a designer you must accept these givens, you
can still create unique experiences through the modification of the
remaining elements because modifying even one element can often
profoundly change the overall experience.


                                             People

People play a central role in all experiences. Recall our earlier discussion
about conscious attention; experiences exist because people are conscious
of them. If no one is aware of an experience, it doesn’t actually happen.
Because of the social bonding that can occur in experiences, you could
also argue that if the right participants aren’t part of the experience, you
won’t achieve the social outcomes that are possible. Delivering a
successful experience directly depends on engaging the right people as
participants.

TABLE 4.1
The Six Elements of the Experiencescape

Element         Description

People          All individuals involved in the experience, including participants and stagers,
                  whether physically present or not
Place           The place in physical space and chronological time in which the experience occurs
Objects         Physical, social, and symbolic objects that play a recognized role in the experience
Rules           The rules that influence experiences, from codified laws to social expectations
Relationships   The relationships people in the experience share that influence their interactions
Blocking        The choreography of people’s location and movement through an experience
   Cruise lines, for example, understand this principle and try to clearly
communicate the nature of their cruises. Some are family oriented and
others are not. On their shore excursions, they clearly communicate the
rigor of walking that is necessary to complete the trip. Children’s toy
manufacturers use a system to indicate the applicable age range for their
toys and games to help parents ensure that they purchase age-appropriate
items for their children. Covering all that would be useful to know about
people is a large order, larger than we can cover in this book. Matching the
right cohort of people to your experience and designing the experience
for a specific cohort are the usual strategies.
   We will get you started and motivated to know as much as practical and
possible in this section. Understanding the people in your experiences is
so crucial that we further develop techniques for accomplishing this
understanding by discussing participant personas in chapter 6.
   Knowing the motivations of the people participating in an experience
is a good starting point to determine person-to-experience fit. What do
your potential participants hope to get out of a particular experience? The
answer to this question is usually apparent. People go to church for a
religious experience. Many churches have expanded opportunities for
congregants to participate in the service to provide a more authentic
experience. So, if you know why people are coming to your experience,
you have a better chance of fulfilling their desires with an on-target
experience design. But figuring out motivations is not always so simple.
Individuals who participate in the same experience often have diverse
motivations and report varying results.
   A broad array of characteristics makes people different from each
other. These include socioeconomic variables, gender, age, and ethnicity,
to name a few. They also include performance variables such as the level
of experience and skill individuals have with the experience in question.
Experiences designed for experts will be much different than those
designed for beginners.
   We imagine that as you’ve read through this section, you’ve thought
primarily about your potential participants. That’s great, and they’re
important, but you need to think about all the people who will be involved
in the staging of the experience. For example, a game of college football
obviously includes players as the main participants, but coaches, referees,
cheerleaders, event staff, spectators, and media members all have
different roles to play. If you consider in advance how to design the roles
these various individuals will play as part of the overall experience, the
whole experience will be better for everyone involved. Frontline staff
members are often a make-or-break element of an experience. Make sure
that they know what is expected of them, they have the skills to complete
expected tasks, and they have a clear understanding of how their actions
will contribute to end users’ experiences.
   In addition, in some experiences individuals who are absent from the
experience can influence the behavior of those present. For example, a
vocalist’s performance will be influenced by what her voice coach has
previously taught her. Children will be influenced by what their parents
have taught them. This category also includes the people providing the
experience who are not physically present. Later in the book we will call
these people “backstage contributors.” The number involved can quickly
become a large group when you consider all the people associated with
delivering an experience, but some are more important than others. A
bride’s wedding dress designer plays a more salient role in the success of a
wedding reception, for example, than the person who cut down the trees
that were eventually fashioned into the backdrop trellis. At the same time,
the best experience designers are aware of and consider the role that key
behind-the-scenes, backstage contributors play in bringing experiences to
life. In some cases, their roles form an interesting backstory that may add
to the overall experience. This will be discussed further later in the book.
    We hope we’ve convinced you of the importance of knowing all you can
about the people who will play a part in your proposed experience. You
need to use available resources to learn as much as possible about them.
Too often, because of a lack of information, experience designers work
from their own perspective rather than from the perspectives of those
who will participate.


                                     Place

Thomas Wendt, in his book Design for Dasein, discusses the German
meaning of the word Dasein: Da means “here or there,” and Sein means
“being there.”7 He continues, “Dasein is situated Being.”8 So, the direct
translation of his book title is Designing for a Situated Instance of Interaction.
We believe that the six elements we are presenting situate being in time
and space. They serve as the primary raw materials the experience
designer uses to build a situated, structured experience. Place is one of
these elements. The place an experience occupies matters. This includes
both its chronological and its physical location, which situate the being or
existence of the experience in time and space. It is interesting that
current research on the physiology of the brain in accounting for and
recording experiences has focused on these two elements, the space
where an experience occurs as well as the time stamping the various
encounters or touchpoints that compose the experience.9
   A good example of the importance of chronological location is date-
dependent experiences like holidays and birthdays. May Day is always
May 1. Christmas is December 25. St. Patrick’s Day is March 17. The
experiences associated with the traditions and rituals of these days would
not be the same on other dates. Although some people would rather
forget their birthday, for others it’s a celebration that can’t be moved or
made up for later. In some cases, experience designers try to piggyback on
the aura of these special days by holding them at other times of the year.
For better or worse, we get Christmas in July, half-birthday celebrations,
and so on. But these experiences often feel like cheap knockoffs of the
original.
    Many experiences are dependent on the time of day. Easter sunrise
services are obviously held when the sun comes up. A New Year’s
celebration comes at midnight in each time zone. Brunch bridges the time
usually reserved for breakfast and lunch. While this all may seem obvious,
it’s important to recognize that time is an important element in your
experience design toolkit. Scheduling a program at a different or unusual
time of day can add excitement and variety. Night golf, played with balls
that glow in the dark, is a novel change from how and when the game is
usually played. It is not enough fun to become the norm, but it is fun to do
occasionally.
    Let’s now shift our focus to the physical location of an experience. The
venue, a term we use to describe the physical setting in which an
experience occurs, has a significant effect on an experience. Each venue
will have facilitating and constraining elements. Some venues are iconic—
Times Square on New Year’s Eve, for instance. People experience a new
year every year, but experiencing the new year in Times Square is a novel
and memorable event for many. Other venues have no obvious meaningful
associations. This allows experience designers to start with a blank slate.
    When selecting a physical location, you need to think carefully about
all the characteristics of a physical location that are discernable through
the five senses: taste, smell, sight, touch, and hearing. Thinking
intentionally about the sensory characteristics of your experience’s
location is extremely important because humans are hardwired to pay
attention to and remember physical settings, especially those where
important experiences occurred. Taste and smell are particularly powerful
memory triggers.
   Mat loves the scene in the Disney movie Ratatouille when the food critic
Anton Ego comes to write a review of the protagonist’s restaurant. He is
served a seemingly uninspiring and provincial dish of ratatouille, but the
taste of his first bite transports Anton back to the warmth, familiarity, and
love of his mother’s kitchen. In this moment, his meal in the restaurant
becomes inextricably connected to cherished childhood memories, and so
he later writes a glowing review. What do you want your experiences to
taste and smell like? It’s no coincidence that Main Street in Disneyland
smells like waffle cones and freshly popped popcorn. These aromas are
artificially diffused throughout this area of the park because they
significantly contribute to the experience.
   Sight is straightforward: What does the space look like? Is it clean? Does
the visual layout of the physical space fit the experience? For some
experiences, the designer will need to carefully plan to change the look
and feel of a venue using decorations. Event planners, including wedding
planners and other special-event planners, put great effort into flowers,
table arrangements, tableware, centerpieces, lighting, and other ways of
altering a venue to make it contribute to the intended experience.
   What does the space feel like to the touch? Bob used to ask his students
to identify experiences in which touch played a primary role in recalling
the experience. Students consistently identified two experiences. One was
dancing at concerts. They loved the feeling of dancing in a tight crowd to
the beat of the music. The second was spending time at the beach. They
loved feeling the sand between their toes, the pleasant breeze of the moist
ocean air on their skin, the feel of saltwater dried on their bodies, and the
feel of the shower water that removed it. Touch matters, often in ways we
do not expect.
    What do you want your experience to sound like? This consideration
includes both volume and types of sounds. Undoubtedly you’ve had
experiences where sound levels were either too loud or too soft, and it’s
amazing how this one element can derail an otherwise great experience.
Think carefully about what you want people to be hearing during different
parts of the experience. If you expect people to talk with each other and
you are playing music, make sure it’s not too loud. If you want to drown
out conversations, then play the music louder.
    If you can get the elements of physical location right, you’ve got a good
foundation for providing an excellent experience. In some cases (e.g.,
you’re designing a product-driven experience), you may have little control
over place. You may, however, be able to provide guidance about the best
and least desirable places in which to use the product. Although some
newer cell phones can be used almost anywhere, most small portable
electronic products that plug in come with cautions about not using them
while bathing or showering.
    What we have pointed out in this section is straightforward but
fundamentally important. If you change the place, you change the
experience. Imagine hiking through a tropical rainforest contrasted with
hiking through the mountains with a light snow falling. Both experiences
involve hiking, but they are very different experiences, and the difference
is in the setting. Simply put: place matters, a lot.


                                  Objects

An object is anything that can have attention called to it and be acted on.
This classification includes physical objects, social objects, and symbolic
objects. Physical objects are obvious: you can see and touch them. Social
objects are other people. Symbolic objects are concepts or ideas that
influence interactions within experiences. Patriotism, competitiveness,
and religiosity are all symbolic objects that motivate us to act in specific
ways.
   In the game of basketball, objects from each of these categories
influence interactions in the game. The ball, the backboard and basket,
and the court are the primary physical objects. Secondary physical objects
are the uniforms and shoes (and today’s designer shoes have raised the
ante about the importance of shoes). Teammates, members of the other
team, your coach, referees, and fans are the primary social objects. Finally,
the rules, the playing strategies the coach has taught, and the clock are
the primary symbolic objects. Collectively, these objects govern the
interactions within the game and both constrain and enable the overall
quality of the experience.
   In some sports, the focus is on the physical objects used in the game.
For example, golf club and ball manufacturers compete fiercely to
promote their products to golfers. In basketball, however, little attention
is paid to the manufacturer of the ball, the hoop, the net, or the
backboard. Because the game is usually played under the same rules, the
focus of basketball is on the differential skills of the players and the
unique game strategies devised by different coaches. In this setting,
coaches are the experience designers of the players’ experiences. They
contribute to outcome by recruiting good players, preparing them
physically, motivating them, and developing excellent game-playing
strategies. Physical training techniques are well known and generally
practiced similarly by most teams. Setting recruiting aside, a basketball
coach’s main contribution is providing players with unique strategies for
playing the game and motivating them to win, both of which are symbolic
objects.
   Contrast this to auto racing, in which the outcome results from the
interaction between the skill of drivers, the competence of their pit crew,
and the performance of their automobiles. The top drivers have similar
driving skills; and although there is some strategy regarding when in a
race to make pit stops, this can change based on unanticipated wrecks on
the racetrack that result in yellow caution periods. Vehicle performance
accounts for a lot of the difference in outcome, which means that auto
racing relies heavily on a primary physical object of the experience—the
race car.
   Our point is that the experience designer must know how these
different types of objects contribute to and influence experiences. This
can become very important when anticipating and designing an
experience involving a product. The product’s manufacturer assumes that
the product will be the focus and determiner of the experiences in which
it will be used. But this may not be the case. Understanding the
experiences the product will facilitate is critical to features of the product
as well as to the marketing strategies developed to promote the product.
You may have seen many ads for golf clubs and balls but none for
basketballs, for example. In chapter 10 we will discuss in detail designing a
product to facilitate an experience.
   People play the role of social objects in experiences. Because they are
capable of self-reflexive, mindful behavior, other people offer more
interactive possibilities during an experience than any other object. You
must take account of the other people involved in experiences, reflect on
and interpret what they are communicating, and develop your own line of
response to them depending on this interpretation. You are also
influenced by people who are not present in the experience. Your
behavior, how you respond to others, is to some degree guided by a range
of social norms and conventions you have learned from your social
network. These collective influences on our behavior have been called a
“generalized other.”10 Everyone has a unique combination of these
influences, though some are predictable. For example, Bob was once in
China on a river cruise with a cohort of Americans. The last evening each
national cohort was to sing a song. Bob’s group decided to sing “Take Me
Out to the Ball Game.” The Chinese cruise director was not surprised. He
told Bob that 95 percent of the American groups sing that song! Their
singing it was predictable with almost complete certainty.
   Another illustration of this “other” phenomenon is the concept of a
team. Let’s return to the basketball example used earlier. An individual
player often makes plays and moves on the court in anticipation of where
and how teammates will move. In this case, the team influences an
individual’s behavior. An experience designer must be aware of any such
generalized others that may be present in an experience and anticipate
their likely influences. For example, one Thanksgiving Bob’s wife invited
an exchange student from Holland to have dinner with their family. She
asked Bob to pick up flowers for the dining table. Bob responded that it
was almost certain a European would bring flowers as a hostess gift.
Indeed, the young lady brought flowers for Bob’s wife to the dinner.


                                  Rules

Experiences are guided by a range of rules, from established laws to social
mores. Their effects must be anticipated and incorporated into the design
of an experience. In some cases, an experience designer may need to
devise additional rules to increase the probability that an experiencescape
will produce the intended type of experience and associated results. Let’s
examine the various levels of rules that may influence interactions in an
experience.
   The highest level of rules includes the laws of the nation, state, and
local authorities. In most cases, it’s reasonable to expect that individuals
who come to your experience will know the laws. In some cases, however,
the experience designer may need to remind people about specific laws
that may affect an experience. For example, alcohol and smoking may not
be allowed in certain venues. In international travel, it’s often important
to remind people of unique or different laws in countries they are visiting.
   The second level of rules is social norms. There are numerous
courtesies that govern our everyday interactions: greeting each other,
queueing for service, taking turns in a classroom, or giving deference to
older people and the disabled for seating. In today’s multicultural society,
experiences are often populated by diverse cohorts of people who may
have disparate social norms. These and similar differences need to be
anticipated and reconciled in an experience design before staging the
experience.
   A third level of rules involves those that may be unique to a specific
experience. In games, for example, there is almost always a set of rules
that governs how the game is played. In organized sports and other more
formalized games, the rules almost always try to ensure that the winner
has best demonstrated whatever is being contested. So, in basketball, the
team with the most points has demonstrated that its players are superior
in running, passing, rebounding, dribbling, and so on, all of which result
in getting the best shots and the most points. Occasionally a team with
less skill will win, but in most cases the team that best performs the
relevant skills will claim victory.
   When a team develops a strategy that seems to give its players an
unfair advantage or an advantage inconsistent with the skills of the game,
rules are often changed. In basketball, the University of North Carolina
coach Dean Smith developed the four-corner offense to slow down game
play and reduce overall scoring. Players would assume positions, one in
each corner of the offensive side of the court, with one player “floating” in
the middle. They would simply keep passing the ball to each other with no
movement toward the basket and no intention of scoring. In today’s fast-
paced game of basketball, this approach seems unfathomable. But the
strategy of slowing down the flow of the game by possessing the ball for
extended periods of time often kept opposing players with the most skill
at shooting from scoring points and winning. The rules were changed by
instituting a shot clock, which limited the amount of time a team could
possess the ball on offense, thus negating the four-corner strategy.
    In less formal games, like board games, there is almost always an
interesting interplay between skill and luck that determines outcome. A
luck mechanism is used because people of differing skill are playing the
game, and the introduction of chance to partly influence outcome
equalizes the possibility of any player winning. For example, the use of
dice or spinning devices is intended to introduce chance in these games.
These chance devices may be used to determine initial position or the
number of advances a player may make. Snakes and Ladders, for example,
is a table game whose outcome is fully dependent on chance. Thus, adults
can play it with children and each player has a chance of winning, even
the child. Winning at chess, in contrast, is almost fully dependent on skill.
This mechanism of increasing chance as a determinant of outcome can
often be used in an experience design to increase interest when people
with unequal skill play together.
    The fourth level of rules involves the social roles that individuals play
out in an experience. A social role comprises a set of behaviors, rights, and
obligations that come with a specific position. In formal situations, these
roles are explicit. In basketball, coaches, players, referees, and spectators
all have specific role expectations. Among the players themselves,
forwards, guards, and centers each have specific roles (or expectations) to
perform in various ways. At the venue where the game is being played,
there will be ticket takers, ushers, medical first responders, and security
personnel. The roles that these cohorts of people each play are well
defined and different.
   Roles still exist in less formal experiences, but they may not be as well
defined. An important design decision is how much leeway to allow
frontline employees as they perform their roles. Early in the operation of
Disneyland, all ride operators were given explicit instructions. The role
they were to play with guests was well defined and usually scripted to
contribute to the unique theme of the specific ride. The only exception
was that guides on the Jungle Cruise ride could develop their own jokes
and scripts. For this reason, Disney employees coveted Jungle Cruise jobs.
   Tour leaders on guided tourist trips perform their roles to meet
customer expectations. Tourists generally expect the leader to take care of
them in unfamiliar surroundings, ensure a safe journey, guide them to the
most significant sights, and share some knowledge about the sites to be
visited. The pacing of these journeys and the amount of information
provided often vary widely based on role performance choices made by
tour leaders. In summary, rules play a big role in experiences. You need to
be aware of relevant laws, social norms, and experience-specific rules and
role expectations when designing experiencescapes.


                              Relationships

Experience designers must anticipate and account for pre-existing
relationships that participants are likely to have and the potential
influence these may exert on the experience. The three most common
relationship arrangements include people already in relationships (e.g.,
friends and families), people with no existing relationships, and mixed
groups where some people know each other but others don’t.
   The first question to settle is whether relationships have any bearing
on the experience. Can people have the experience without interacting
with their accompanying participants? This is often the case. The
audience in a movie theater, for instance, is usually a mixed group, but
there is no need for everyone to get to know each other before the movie
starts. In other cases, like a wedding luncheon, relationships do matter,
and they deserve specific design attention.
   A second point to consider is whether the experience will be enhanced
by participants getting to know each other. If so, the experience design
will need to include mechanisms to facilitate this. For example, at sporting
events, cohorts of family and friends often attend along with lots of
people who don’t know each other. The only relationship these diverse
groups have with each other is that they are fans of a specific team.
Usually the experience design mechanisms used in this situation are
intended only to enhance the participants’ relationship as co-fans. Team
colors, logos, fight songs, yells, and other such mechanisms are used to
help these diverse individuals socialize as co-fans. Most often, there is no
attempt to get them to socialize on any other dimension, and pre-existing
cohorts can enjoy the experience on a parallel basis as family and friends
and as co-fans.
   If there is no need for people to get acquainted, to try to push this point
is often counterproductive. These people have come with pre-existing
family or friend cohorts, and forcing them to expand their group often
comes at the expense of their desire to deepen their familial and
friendship relationships. It would be rather awkward if you were asked to
walk around and introduce yourself to everyone in a restaurant before
ordering your meal. But in other situations, people need to get to know
each other to fully engage in the experience. For example, in a multiday
river-float trip, the rafts used will probably accommodate larger groups of
people than the cohorts that have signed up for the trip. The groups on
each raft need to get to know each other so that they can function as a
team to paddle the rafts down the river and work together to complete
camping duties each night. Thus, the guides will need to take specific
steps, like icebreaker activities, to develop some sense of esprit de corps
on their rafts.


                                 Blocking

The final experiencescape element, blocking, involves structuring how
people in the experience will move through chronological time and
physical space. It is this motion through time and space and the affective
role participants play in this motion that makes experience a unique
human phenomenon.11 Claude Romano, the French philosopher, states
that “experience, in its fundamental sense, is that which, by putting us in
play ourselves, modifies us profoundly in a way that after having crossed,
endured, traversed it, we will never be the same again.”12 Wolff-Michael
Roth and Alfredo Jornet, two science education writers, emphasize that
experience is unique because it moves through time and space and
involves affective interaction between participants.13
    Envision a movie production set where all the five elements are in place
and everyone is waiting for the director to yell “action.” When “action” is
shouted, the motion part of a motion picture begins. Until then, it is just a
still photograph. The process by which a director determines where and
how people move through the set is “blocking.” Experience designers must
intentionally structure the blocking of an experience to influence the
sequence and flow through time and space to put the experience in
motion.
    Let’s examine another example, this time from an art museum. There
are currently three methods used to move people through galleries. One is
a self-guided tour enabling patrons to move through the gallery at their
own speed and view whatever comes next or make their own choices
about what to see using a printed guidebook. A second method is a
preplanned audio tour that provides commentary about set pieces and has
a strategy about which pieces will be pointed out for viewing. A third
method is a guided tour with a docent or staff member. Usually these
latter tours involve viewing fewer pieces but listening to more
commentary about each piece. So, there you have it—three different
experiences at an art museum, each differentiated from the others by how
it is blocked.
    Art museums as well as other types of museums are trying to deal with
techniques for blocking that move a mostly spectator, observer experience
into a participatory one. Nina Simon’s book The Participatory Museum is a
call to action for rethinking how people experience museums and cultural
institutions.14 She ponders: “How can cultural institutions reconnect with
the public and demonstrate their value and relevance in contemporary
life? I believe they can do this by inviting people to actively engage as
cultural participants, not passive consumers.”15 The book includes many
wonderful suggestions, all focused on creating opportunities to
participate in experiences rather than simply being passive consumers.
Science museums especially have taken on this charge to provide
participatory experiences illustrating and teaching various scientific
concepts.
   Are there other methods of blocking? We have already identified one
method: having an appointed leader. This is a time-honored method and
probably the most used. Examples of appointed leaders include classroom
teachers, preachers, sport coaches, football quarterbacks, theater
directors, and tour guides. Because this approach requires employing
people, it can be the most expensive blocking method. Many organizations
now use docents and volunteers to lead in order to keep costs low. Having
a designated leader is indeed a sure way to animate an experience. And, in
some cases, the leader is the key element in the experience. People will
pay a premium to attend a program on personal finance led by Dave
Ramsey or Suze Orman. Although many experiences are animated by
leaders, not all leaders are the same, of course!
   The pacing of an experience also is a component of blocking. You might
remember the famous I Love Lucy candy factory episode, where the
initially slow candy-production line suddenly speeds up and Lucy and
Ethel cannot keep up. To avoid such a scenario in your designed
experience, you need to make sure the pace promotes the desired
experience. The pacing of a trip or tour for senior citizens or children
affects participant enjoyment. Bob recently took a cruise where walking-
tour groups were designated as fast paced or regular paced depending on
the participants’ ambulatory abilities. People could select which group to
join. After the first day, several people moved groups based on the
previous day’s experience. In tour groups, also, the guide always
experiences tension in whether to tell folks a lot about a few attractions or
be briefer but cover more attractions. Some participants like a lot of
information, whereas others want to see a greater variety of attractions.
   Another method of blocking we have not yet discussed is mechanical.
Amusement parks use this method to move individuals through their
various attractions. Customers ride on some type of themed seating, such
as a boat or airplane, and are moved along a track of some kind. In some
ways this approach is akin to the Henry Ford assembly line. People ride on
the assembly line and view various mechanical displays along the way, and
what is produced is an experience. Some of these attractions do not allow
much interaction by participants, although newer ones are incorporating
interactive opportunities to make them more engaging and the
experience provided more sustainable. For example, a number of
Disneyland rides based on the Toy Story movie franchise, Buzz Lightyear’s
Space Ranger Spin and Toy Story Midway Mania, allow riders to shoot
guns at targets. Individual rider scores are recorded and posted at the end
of each ride, adding co-creative and competitive elements to the
experience.
   Time can also be used as a blocking device. A countdown clock is used
in many sports and other gaming events to move an experience along.
Many computer games and other virtual-reality experiences are moved
forward in time by a countdown clock. The time constraint creates
anticipation and excitement and also allows participants to know
beforehand how long the experience will last.
   Other mechanisms for implementing blocking include a printed self-
guide booklet, signage providing a point-to-point path through an
attraction, and the like. An experience designer must anticipate the need
to block the experience and employ an appropriate method for doing so.
Having the skill to visualize and vicariously participate in an experience is
an essential tool experience designers require to effectively block an
experience. We will discuss this topic more in chapter 7.


                The Ubiquitous Web and Social Media
In today’s world, the role of technology needs to be taken into account
when designing an experience. Although we did not add technology as a
seventh element, the ubiquity of technology like mobile devices and social
media cannot be ignored. Potential participants will likely learn of your
offered experience through some form of social media, they may sign up
for it using their mobile device, and they will often evaluate it and
communicate about their experience with their friends through social
media. David Meerman Scott offers excellent advice about this topic in The
New Rules of Marketing & PR. According to Scott, the web is the primary
source of information for billions of individuals worldwide,16 and their
primary access device is their mobile phone.17 He offers a number of tips
useful to experience designers, including these:

  • The web has provided access to small groups of potential niche
    customers not previously accessible.
  • Web users are seeking information and knowledge, not hyperbole
    about your offerings.
  • To be well positioned in the web, you must understand the
    keywords your buyers are using and use them in your copy.

   The preceding list is derived from Scott’s work.18 His book not only
explains the new rules but also teaches you how to deal with them to
access potential customers of your experiences. Designing a great
experience is critical, and we are teaching you how to do that. But you also
need to market your experiences well to obtain actual consumers. Scott
teaches you how to do that.


       Summary: The Unending Variety of Experiencescape
                       Combinations
All experiences occur in experiencescapes that are made up of six
elements. These elements are fundamental; if you change one, you may
change the entire experience. If you change the rules of a game, you have
changed the game in some way. If you change the players in a game, you
change game strategies, performance capabilities, and so on. These
elements are the primary building blocks available to help you
intentionally design an experiencescape and produce the experience you
intend. Here we have also introduced the notion that you need to be able
to market your experience over the web to succeed.
   In many cases, the experience designer is given one or more elements
and asked to manipulate the others to create an experience. For example,
you may be given a specific product—an object to be acted on in an
experience—and asked to design an experience or experiences to which
the product could contribute. We discuss this in detail in chapter 10 with
an example of developing the Golf Buddy© product for use in the golfing
experience. You may have a venue—a fly-fishing camp, for example—and
be asked to develop experiences that could be operated there to create
revenue streams for the enterprise. The permutations are endless, but
these elements provide a fundamental framework around which your
design efforts will be organized. As we build your experience design skills,
in succeeding chapters we will present a process for using these six
elements to design experiences. In the next chapter we explain how the
principles and processes of design thinking can be employed in
experience design.
                            CHAPTER FIVE




         Experience Design Thinking


IN CHAPTER 1 we quoted the following statement about what it means to
design something: it is “the ability to imagine that-which-does-not-yet-
exist, to make it appear in concrete form as a new, purposeful addition to
the real world.”1 In this chapter we want to introduce you to a
methodology, called “design thinking,” that will help you infuse
innovation into the design of your experiences. When you engage in
experience design, though you often draw inspiration from other
experiences, you are creating something new and unique. Venturing into
the unknown with only creativity as a guide can energize some but
paralyze others.
   Many people view creativity as an ability endowed at birth. Either
you’re creative or you’re not. This myth, along with many other talent-
related myths, has been soundly disproved.2 Although genetic and
environmental factors influence innate differences in creative
propensities, through volitional engagements of various experience
design problems, you can develop your own creativity. In a similar way
that muscles grow stronger with regular exercise, creative abilities
develop when given frequent opportunities for application.
   In Creative Confidence, Tom and David Kelly make an excellent case that
anyone can increase the ability to engage in creative work.3 Some people
may seem more naturally creative, but it’s most likely because they’ve
spent more time engaged in creative activities. They have practiced being
creative, which means they have probably had their fair share of creative
failures as well, and that’s okay. Too often, when it comes to creating
something new, it’s assumed that perfection is required on the first try.
This is simply not true. Creativity is messy. A final, polished creative end
product is almost always built on a foundation of imperfect previous
efforts. This is true of almost every great artistic or scientific
breakthrough. Consider the case of Thomas Edison, who definitely wasn’t
afraid of failure. He experienced thousands of unsuccessful attempts
before inventing the incandescent light bulb. His failures paved the way to
his eventual, world-changing invention.
   We give you license to be imperfect when designing experiences. We
hope you experience many failures along the way, as long as you keep
moving forward. In fact, failing fast and frequently is a key principle of all
creative acts, including experience design, because this is how you learn
what’s working and what needs further development.4 To reap the
benefits of failure, you must be willing to share your ideas before they’re
ready so that you can get frequent feedback early in the design process. In
this chapter, we’re going to show you how to employ a tested innovation
process to tackle the wicked problem that is experience design.


                            Wicked Problems
Designing experiences is complex. As an experience designer, you have to
situate the elements of the experiencescape in a way you think will
produce desirable perceived results for participants, other key
stakeholders, and yourself. There’s a lot going on when you are designing
an experience with the goal of producing intentionally targeted results for
a specific group. This is what makes experience design a classic example of
a wicked problem.
   Horst Rittel and Melvin Webber’s 1973 paper, “Dilemmas in a General
Theory of Planning,” brought attention to the concept of wicked
problems.5 In their paper, Rittel and Webber contrast tame and wicked
problems. Tame problems are clearly defined and have clear solutions. The
authors use a simple math equation as an example of a tame problem. The
task at hand (e.g., 2 + 2 = 4) is clear, and only one correct solution exists.
The term wicked does not indicate the moral nature of a problem but,
rather, highlights its complex nature. In contrast to tame problems,
wicked problems may be unique; are difficult to define; lack a clear,
singular solution or stopping point; and involve a diverse group of
stakeholders who may have conflicting priorities.
   Experience design problems involve people and are thus inherently
wicked because of the complexity of human behavior. Rittel and Webber,
along with many others, suggest that wicked problems should be
approached differently than tame problems. Wicked problems, like
designing experiences, require their own methodology. In this chapter
we’re going to use design thinking to sequentially organize the content
and tools covered thus far into a methodology for tackling wicked
experience design problems, which we call “experience design thinking.”


                             Design Thinking
Design thinking has received increasing attention over the last ten-to-
twenty years as a broadly applicable and accessible design approach to
solve wicked problems. Design thinking provides an ideal process to guide
the experience design process. In the following sections we provide
background information on design thinking, discuss each stage of the
process, and then use this process to provide a sequential structure to the
experience design content presented to this point in the book. We’ll wrap
up the chapter with an official introduction to the process of experience
design thinking.
   David Kelly, who played founding roles in both the Hasso Plattner
Institute of Design at Stanford University, known as the d.school, and the
design firm IDEO, was central to synthesizing previous work on the design
process to propose a formalized methodology he called “design thinking.”
Focusing on human values is the foundational mindset for design
thinking. Another term often used in conjunction with design thinking is
human-centered design. The idea is that you can’t design anything unless
you develop empathy for your targeted participants. The best experience
designers are empathetic. They actively seek to understand their
participants’ perspectives and use them as a guiding influence for the
whole design process. They also have a propensity for forward progress,
meaning they move rapidly through the design process without
belaboring particular points. For more information on the principles
behind design thinking, we encourage you to visit the d.school and IDEO
resource websites.6
   There are several different frameworks for design thinking, but we like
the five-stage process used by the d.school:

  • Empathize
  • Define
  • Ideate
  • Prototype
  • Test7

The five stages are often introduced as a linear sequence, but in practice
they usually occur as part of a cyclical process. The following subsections
provide more details on each stage.


                               Empathize

In chapter 4 when we were discussing the importance of understanding
the people participating in your experience, we promised additional
techniques for accomplishing this. Learning to gain empathy for your
participants is one of them. Merriam-Webster defines empathy as “the
action of understanding, being aware of, being sensitive to, and
vicariously experiencing the feelings, thoughts, and experience of
another.”8 To engage in design thinking, you must know who your
participants are and invest the necessary time and resources to
understand them. It’s easy to simply design experience you think would
be desirable rather than what your participants really need or want.
Taking the time to develop empathy with your participants helps you to
view the experience you’re designing from their perspective.
   Developing empathy when creating experiences for others is especially
important because the results of the experiences you design are
contingent on the perceptions of your participants. Remember, Clay
Shirky told us participants expect their presence to matter in the
unfolding action of an experience. In chapter 1 we introduced a figure
modified from work by Mat and his colleagues at Brigham Young
University that represented the interaction between participants and the
elements of an experience; this figure produces perceived results.9 In the
paper associated with this figure, Mat and his colleagues, drawing on a
pool of interdisciplinary literature, identified the following participant
elements that influence this interaction:

  • Relationships—Any relationship participants have with
    individuals, both present and not present, that influence their
    perception of the experience. For example, the participants’
    social-media connections who express opinions about the
    experience are one important relationship.
  • Thoughts—Any relevant cognitive processing about the
    experience. What do the participants think about the type of
    experience you plan to offer?
  • Emotions—Feelings that participants bring into the experience
    and develop during the experience. How do they feel about the
    experiences you plan to offer?
  • Values—Ethical and moral opinions held by participants. Do your
    participants have pre-existing ethical or moral opinions about the
    experiences you plan to offer?
  • Activities—Physical and mental activities engaged in before or
    during the experience. This often relates to necessary knowledge
    and skill that have been acquired during previous experiences
    that would influence how the participants perceive your
    experience.
  • Memories—Take account of all relevant memories from previous
    engagements that may influence participants’ interpretations of
    the current experience.
  • Personal     Characteristics—Pertinent       demographic      and
    psychographic characteristics.10
Once you identify who your participants will be, you need to make sure
you gather as much information related to these elements as possible. To
gain empathy with potential participants, consider observing them in
their day-to-day contexts. If possible, try to observe them participating in
experiences like the one you hope to design. Also, engage with them. Ask
them questions to gather information related to their relationships,
thoughts, emotions, activities, values, memories, and personal
characteristics. This can be accomplished through surveys, in formal
interviews, or by observing and talking with participants. Take notes and
pictures—anything that helps capture insights and synthesize your
findings.
   A great example of the benefits of gaining empathy with participants
comes from a classic article by Harvard Business School professor Clayton
Christensen and his colleagues titled “Finding the Right Job for Your
Product.”11 In the article, Christensen recounts how gathering
observational data about end users provided their research team with
empathetic insights about the job people were “hiring” milkshakes to do
for them. When a large fast-food company wanted to improve milkshake
sales, they brought in Christensen’s team to help them understand the
characteristics of the milkshakes that were most important to customers.
   One of the team members decided to observe the process of people
purchasing and consuming milkshakes. The conclusions drawn from these
observations were as follows: most milkshakes were purchased in the
morning, they were the only item purchased, purchasers were alone, and
they left the store to enjoy their shake. Accordingly, the team realized that
shakes were being purchased by commuters who needed something they
could consume while driving to work. So much for eggs and bacon! This
insight was the direct result of spending the time needed to understand
the end users’ experiences and the job they were “hiring” milkshakes to
do, which was to provide them an on-the-go breakfast.
   Good experience designers know that developing empathy with their
participants is essential. John Connors, the vice president of event
development for Bigsley Event House, believes that the ability to
empathize is the most essential trait of great experience designers.12
Taking time to develop a deep understanding of the people you want to
design for will have a dramatic effect on the quality of experiences you
create.


                                Define

Once you’ve developed a sense of empathy with your participants, it’s
time to define the most pressing needs you hope to address with the
experience. The d.school explains the purpose of the define stage as

  your chance … to define the challenge you are taking on, based on
  what you have learned about your user and about the context. After
  becoming an instant-expert on the subject and gaining invaluable
  empathy for the person you are designing for, this stage is about
  making sense of the widespread information you have gathered.13
Figure 5.1 Empathy map.


   The first step of defining is to organize and synthesize your empathy
data. One way to do this is to use an empathy map, a tool originally
developed by Dave Gray.14 To create your own simplified empathy map,
draw a circle in the middle of a piece of paper or on a whiteboard. In the
middle of the circle write the name of the individual you collected data
from. Divide the rest of the circle into four quadrants (see figure 5.1).
Label the quadrants “think,” “feel,” “say,” and “do.” Now organize your
findings by writing the information on sticky notes and placing them in
the quadrants where they apply.
   When you complete your empathy map, you should have a list of the
identified needs and potential insights you gained during the process,
which you’ll then use to create what the d.school calls a “point of view
[POV]”15 statement. A POV statement is “your reframing of a design
challenge into an actionable problem statement.”16 You can use the
following rubric to create POV statements:

   “[User] needs to [user’s need] because [surprising insight].”17

Developing the right POV is critical to the rest of the process. So, you
should invest the time necessary to develop a good one. You’ll want to
look over the empathy data you have gathered to identify the most
pressing needs and interesting insights you discovered. At this point, you
are engaging in data reduction. You must focus on the most salient one-
to-three unique points that must be addressed. If you cannot get focused
at this point, you will have too many issues to respond to and there will
not be enough resources to develop the key themes of your experience. It
you are still struggling, draft a few different POV statements to see which
one resonates most with you and your participants.
   This process can get more complicated with some experiences. For
example, in developing experiences for children, multiple stakeholders
are involved—the child, the parent, or some other adult who will make the
decision to purchase or allow the child to participate in the experience. In
these cases, you may need to create separate POVs for the children and
the adults involved.
   Here’s a quick example of the POV development process. Let’s say you
are a hotel manager who wants to design a new check-in procedure for
repeat customers. After gathering empathy data, you realize that these
customers have several needs that must be met concurrently. They want
to feel recognized for their loyalty to your brand, they want to feel at
home when they come to your hotel, and they want check-in to be hassle-
free and quick. You create the following POV statement based on this
information:

  Our repeat customers want to be personally recognized when checking in
  because it’s nice to feel “at home” when they’re on the road, and they want
  their check-in to be quick and simple.

You then use this statement along with the empathy map(s) created in the
empathize stage to guide the remaining steps of the process. There is no
one perfect POV statement. Crafting a POV statement is important, but
don’t spend too much time wordsmithing. Remember, we told you to be
messy; you can go back to modify your POV later if needed.


                                 Ideate

Now that you have both a POV statement and an empathy map (or maps)
in hand, you can begin to come up with solutions to address identified
needs. Although this is the point where many people start the experience
design process, don’t make that same mistake! We have found that
skipping the empathize and define stages will often result in designing
solutions to the wrong problem. Employing experience design thinking
requires that you begin ideating only once you understand your
participants and their most compelling needs. Because you’ve most likely
engaged in some type of brainstorming or ideation before, we don’t want
to spend too much time on this topic, but we would like to offer a word of
caution and then highlight a few important best practices.
   We add the caution that this sequential process of identifying a
problem and then developing solutions works only if you have correctly
determined the problem that matters most to your participants. Thomas
Wendt has written about this problem-solution paradox: “Problems and
solutions evolve together and must be understood together.”18 He also
explains that “the linear movement from problem to solution does not
leave room for exploring the effects of solutions on the system for which
they are designed.”19 So, it is often the case that the designer must move
back and forth between the problem and the proposed solutions as each
helps further define the other. We believe that these iterations occur in
actual design practice but are often not noted in diagrams or descriptions
of designing experiences. We empower you to be as nonlinear as needed
to design better!
    Ideation involves two distinct stages: divergence and convergence.
When you engage in divergent ideation, the goal is to come up with as
many ideas as quickly as possible. Effective ideation requires you to push
perfectionism aside and be open to out-of-the-box and half-baked ideas.
For many of us, doing this is difficult. Because we may feel our
professional competence is on the line, we usually present only polished
solutions. The problem with this approach is that it constrains your ability
to come up with novel and innovative ideas. It’s common for the first set
of ideas during an ideation session to be safe and standard. One way to
avoid this pitfall is to force yourself and your design team to generate at
least fifty ideas. It can be helpful to write each idea on a sticky note and
then place the sticky notes on a table or wall. Remember, during divergent
ideating the goal is quantity, not quality. At this point don’t worry about
feasibility (how much an idea will cost) or viability (whether putting the
idea into action is even possible). Let yourself think freely about all
potential solutions to the POV statement in question.
    When generating ideas, it’s also important to make sure your ideating
is both fluent and flexible. In the context of ideating, fluency refers to the
quantity of ideas produced, flexibility to the variety of ideas produced.20
Fluent and flexible ideation results in lots of diverse ideas. Check yourself
as you ideate to ensure that you’re not getting into a rut of simply coming
up with variations of the same theme. Push yourself to be radical and
diverse in your solution generation.
    Once you’ve generated a sufficient number of ideas—remember the
goal of fifty—you can shift into convergent ideation. The goal here is to
sift through the generated ideas to identify those you want to move
forward into prototyping. This involves eliminating, combining, and
identifying the ideas most promising for solving your stated problem. As
you do this, remember to keep the POV statement and your empathy maps
in mind because you want to be selecting the ideas you think will resonate
with your participants and address their primary needs, not yours or your
team’s.
   The d.school has some great guidance regarding convergence. It is
useful to think of the process as convergence or agreement rather than
conflict resolution for your design team. It’s about working together to
select the best solutions for your participants, not defending and
promoting favorite ideas. Two ideas we especially like are “Post-it voting”
and “the four-category method.”21 With Post-it voting, you allow the
ideation group members to vote for their top three or four ideas, and the
ideas that receive the most votes move forward into prototyping. With the
four-category method, you organize all ideas into four predetermined
categories—the d.school suggests these: “the rational choice, the most
likely to delight [your participant], the darling [of the group], and the long
shot.”22 You then select a few ideas from each category.
   Regardless of how you engage in divergent and convergent ideation,
remember the goal is to create solutions that address the POV statement
in a way that will resonate with participants. You want a solution for
them, their needs, and their problems. Ideation should be energizing and
fun. You can ideate on your own, but we find that the best ideation
sessions are group affairs. The energy of a group ideation session is
infectious. Remember, though, you must help the group members
understand the importance of rejecting perfectionism and not passing
judgment on all the ideas they generate. With these ground rules in place,
you should be able to easily come up with some exciting ideas to move
into prototyping.
                                Prototype

Prototyping involves taking the ideas you generated in the previous stage
and turning them into physical, actionable artifacts, or what Eric Ries calls
“minimum viable products.”23 While it’s easy for most people to think
about prototypes for buildings or products, it might be trickier to get your
head around prototyping experiences. The d.school’s “Introduction to
Design Thinking Process Guide” states that “a prototype can be anything
that a user can interact with[,] … something a user can experience.”24 So
what types of experience prototypes could you create to foster
interaction? Remember, this could be physical as well as cognitive
interaction. Common experience prototypes include low-fidelity mockups
of experience settings (e.g., cardboard storefronts), role-play situations
(e.g., walking participants through a new hotel check-in experience),
storyboards and mock agendas, or experimental versions of a new product
that can be tested with participants.
   The goal is not to create a final, polished version of your experience but
to develop a prototype you can use to facilitate feedback from potential
participants. The benefit is that you can find out what works and doesn’t
work with your experience before investing the time and resources
needed to implement the final version. Prototyping is a discovery activity
taking place before implementation rather than a production process.
   Developing an actionable representation of your experience will also
get you to think differently about your ideated solution[s]. When problem-
solving, we often default to thinking and talking about solutions.
Prototyping forces you to sketch, build, and engage with your ideas in a
more tactile fashion. Seymour Papert, a student of the renowned
psychologist Jean Piaget, spent his career developing and promoting his
theory of constructivism, which suggested that learning happens most
effectively when learners build things related to what they are thinking
and learning about.25 Trust us, and Papert, on this one, prototyping will
help you gather richer feedback from potential participants and cause you
to think more deeply and creatively about your ideas.
    We have also used experience maps, a topic we’ll cover in depth in
chapter 6, as prototypes that allow for vicarious engagement of the
experience. Once you know your participants, understand and articulate
their needs, and develop a variety of potential solutions to those needs,
you are ready to create an experience map. It is a prototyped experience
journey. Although you can create a variety of experience prototypes—and
we encourage you to be creative about this process—keep in mind that
creating an experience map is an extremely effective prototype approach.
It’s also important to have the mindset that all experiences are prototypes
that can continually be refined.


                                   Test

The testing stage is all about receiving feedback about the prototypes
you’ve created. It’s a time to be open to input rather than defensive about
your ideas. If you create an experience role-play, walk potential
participants through the role-play and then ask for their feedback. If you
create a prototype of an experience setting, allow potential participants to
interact with the setting and then provide you with feedback. In essence,
you’re providing testers with a prototyped, interactive experience.
   Because gathering feedback is the primary purpose of testing, make
sure you prepare to systematically gather as much data as you can. When
possible, it’s helpful to have multiple testing facilitators who have been
assigned specific roles. You can have one person facilitate the testing
experience; another person observe the testing process, paying particular
attention to testing participants’ reactions to the prototype and how they
interact with it; and finally, someone to conduct a formal debriefing with
participants either individually or in a focus-group setting.
   Although testing prototypes with actual participants is ideal, in some
situations it’s not always feasible. For this reason, we want to show you
the versatility of using an experience map, a tool we’ll discuss further in
chapter 6, as a prototype for testing, with or without participants, using
visualization. What we mean by visualization is seeing the prototyped
experience in your mind’s eye.26 Using this approach, if you have access to
participants, you would use the experience map as a script to help them
visualize the experience, perhaps in a focus group. Ask them to close their
eyes, and then you describe to them, in as much detail as possible, each
touchpoint of the experience. Encourage them to visualize what you’re
describing and to make notes or to provide feedback either during or after
the visualization process.
   If you don’t have access to participants, you can visualize the
experience map yourself. This can be quite effective if you’ve done your
empathy homework, because you will be able to draw on that information
to try to see the experience from your participants’ eyes. In fact,
visualizing in this way can be extremely useful because you can walk
through your experience map from the perspective of different
participants who might engage in your experience. Take note of how they
might perceive various touchpoints of the experience differently. For
example, take any experience and visualize it from the perspective of an
adult versus that of a child. Just the difference in height will sometimes
point out things that need to be modified. Finally, it can also be beneficial
to visualize the experience from a bird’s-eye view to see how participants
move through the experiencescape you plan or design.
   However you decide to test your experience, remember that the goal is
to receive and act on feedback. Experience design thinking is an iterative
process, meaning that you should take the feedback you received and
return to earlier stages of the process to continue revising the design. You
may want to go back to tweak your prototypes, or you may find that you
need to completely rewrite your POV statement. The more open you are to
change and refinement, the better your experience will be in the end.


          Summary: Experience Design + Design Thinking

We’re excited about the merger of experience design and design thinking
into experience design thinking. We believe that the design-thinking
approach is an excellent methodology to organize and apply the content
and tools covered in the book. It serves as an organizational framework for
experience design. It lays out a process, which when applied will produce
innovative experience design solutions. The next two chapters will
introduce you to experience mapping, a topic alluded to earlier in this
chapter. Learning how to map macroexperiences and then design their
constituent microexperiences will allow you to create extremely useful
experience prototypes. If you take the time to use all the tools you will be
exposed to in the remaining chapters in the book and then use the
methodology of experience design thinking to apply them, we know that
you will create effective, innovative, and high-quality experiences.
                              CHAPTER SIX




   Designing the Experience Journey


IN CHAPTER 4 we took a granular perspective of experiences to examine
the essential elements of experiencescapes. In this chapter, we’re going to
change our perspective and assume an aerial view to observe how each
microexperience links together to build the journey that is our
macroexperience. To do this, we’re going to talk about public bathrooms,
Disneyland, and mapmaking. But to start things off, let’s look first at the
relationship between designing experiences and composing music to learn
two key experience design principles.


                              Perfect Pitch

Mat enjoys listening to classical music while he writes. He especially loves
Johann Sebastian Bach’s cello suites. Great composers, like Bach,
understand how to combine notes, chords, tempo, instruments, voices,
and other musical elements to create a holistic musical experience. True
classics, like Bach’s cello suites, continue to captivate listeners today.
There are few experiences that can lay claim to a similar shelf life. Music
composition provides an excellent analogy to convey two important
experience design insights that will play a key role in the topics we’re
discussing in this chapter: intentionality and heterogeneity.


                             Intentionality

Consider the degree of intentionality that goes into composing a
symphony. Each note, among hundreds if not thousands, is meticulously
placed to complement those around it and fit into the flow of the entire
piece. The whole musical score requires intentional arrangement. It’s
absurd even to consider a composer masterfully crafting certain sections
of a piece while simply throwing random notes together without rhyme or
reason in other sections. Even someone with an untrained musical ear
would easily be able to determine sections that were intentionally
arranged and those that were not. And, most likely, the dissonance of the
unintentional sections would mask the harmony of the intentional ones.
   Designing experiences is similar; all notes (i.e., microexperiences)
require intentional design. You’ve probably had experiences in which
meticulous attention to detail was paid to certain elements of an
experience, whereas other aspects obviously received no forethought.
Consider the public bathroom. You may have had an otherwise great
restaurant, movie, music, shopping, or amusement park experience
marred by a visit to a dirty public bathroom in the venue. No matter how
great the rest of the experience has been, this one negative
microexperience can derail an otherwise positive macroexperience. After
encountering a dirty bathroom, you may even start thinking, “If the
bathrooms are overlooked, what else about this experience has been
ignored?” As a designer, you should make sure that all microexperiences
receive the same degree of intentionality to provide uniform quality
across your designed experiences. This means, among other things, that
your bathrooms need to be clean.
   In some cases, intentional attention to prosaic microexperiences, like
using the facilities, can be leveraged into a competitive distinction. Buc-
ee’s Travel Centers are a good case in point. If you live in Texas, you
already know what we’re talking about; but if you’re a non-Texan, let us
explain. Buc-ee’s is a gas station chain in Texas known for, among other
things, perennially winning the “America’s Best Restroom” contest. In an
article in Texas Monthly magazine titled “Holy Crap,” author Jason Cohen
describes the attention to detail Buc-ee’s gives to the restroom
experience. So sure that their bathroom experience is amazing, Buc-ee’s
actively promotes it with billboards showing messages like “The Top Two
Reasons to Stop at Buc-ee’s: Number 1 and Number 2” and “Restrooms
You Have to Pee to Believe.”1
   Walt Disney, experience designer extraordinaire, innately understood
the importance of intentionally designing all microexperiences. Walt’s
focus on all details of an experience fostered the Disney theme parks’
mantra of “everything speaks.”2 This means that every element within an
experience sends a message to participants in the same way that each
note in a symphony sends a message to listeners. A clean bathroom says,
“This is a clean place because we care about the details of your
experience,” whereas a dirty bathroom says, “We’re overwhelmed with
running other things and we didn’t have time to get this cleaned.” You
want to make sure that all elements share a cohesive message because
even one discordant element can ruin the harmony of the experience.
   This principle of “everything speaks” applies to all elements of every
microexperience within a macroexperience. Walt Disney’s attention to
detail in the design of Disneyland is legendary. One example is his
insistence that each area of Disneyland have unique and theme-
appropriate pavement because “you can get information about a changing
environment through the soles of your feet.”3 Disney knew that even the
pavement at Disneyland would send a message, albeit a potentially
subconscious one, and he wanted that message to align with and
contribute to the rest of the experience elements in the park. Achieving
this degree of comprehensive intentionality takes sustained effort, but it
often marks the difference between forgettable and unforgettable
experiences.


                              Heterogeneity

Merriam-Webster defines heterogeneity as “the quality or state of consisting
of dissimilar or diverse elements.” We know this word is a mouthful, but
it’s more descriptive of what we’re trying to convey than are terms like
variety or uniqueness. It speaks to arrangements of diverse elements in
unique but intentional, rather than random, ways. It has connections to
words like creativity and innovation because they all deal with bringing
diverse elements together in new ways. We also think that because it’s
probably not a word you use every day, its novelty will help it stick in your
head.
    Okay, so now you know what heterogeneity means, but what does it
have to do with music and experiences? Bob loves to sing. He has
performed in choirs and barbershop quartets, and recently he had the
distinct honor of performing with his church choir in Carnegie Hall in
New York City. He can tell you that great music does not usually consist
simply of the ad nauseam repetition of a small handful of the same notes.
Most compositions begin with a melody and then build on variations of
the melody to create a complete piece.
   Great experience designers employ the principle of heterogeneity by
implementing a variety of microexperiences drawn from across the
experience-type framework to create diversity in macroexperiences. The
sequence and type of microexperiences are intentionally arranged to
positively engage participants throughout the course of the
macroexperience. Heterogeneity keeps us engaged as listeners and
participants. The best musicians and experience designers know how to
use rises and falls in action, dissonance and harmony, and ritual and
novelty, among other techniques, to create multifaceted experiences for
their end users. Homogenous experiences, on the other hand, are made up
of a finite number of elements arranged in repetitive patterns.
Homogenous experiences lull participants into system 1 thinking.
Heterogeneous experiences keep your participants engaged because they
actively enjoy the moment while anticipating what’s going to happen
next.
   You’re probably thinking, “Okay, so how do I actually go about infusing
those principles into my experiences?” Good question—so let’s explore
some specific experience design approaches to do just that.


                         Experience Mapping

Over the last decade the concept of experience mapping has become a hot
topic as a core experience design approach. The awareness that
experiences matter has led people to realize that they need a way to
conceptually orchestrate what the experiences they provide look like for
end users. Although different types of experience maps exist (e.g., service
blueprints, customer journey maps, experience maps, existing and future
state maps),4 all share a similar focus on mapping the microexperiences
that make up macroexperiences. In this chapter we’re going to teach you
how to use experience maps to create experience prototypes. Experience
mapping can also be used to evaluate and re-envision existing
experiences. It is an essential and versatile tool for all experience
designers.


                  Key Elements of Experience Maps

Experience maps come in many different shapes and sizes. Our goal is to
introduce you to what we believe are the key components of any
experience map. This will give you a starting point to begin building your
own experience maps. If you want to learn more about this topic, there
are some great resources out there that will allow you to expand your
experience-mapping toolkit. Here is a list of a few of these resources:

  • Mapping Experiences by Jim Kalbach
  • Oracle’s website, Designingcx.com
  • The experience-mapping resources at Adaptivepath.org

To be a proficient experience designer, you need to be comfortable with
the following experience-mapping elements: personas, intentionality,
touchpoints, reactions, and front- and backstage contributors.


                                Personas

Before you build an experience map, you need to decide whose journey
you’re mapping. We’re not talking about a simple target audience or
market segment; we’re talking about the specific individuals you envision
as being potential participants of the experience you’re designing. You
might ask why. Well, first, we’ve already explained that experiences are
individually perceived. Second, good experience design needs to always be
participant focused. You’re not designing your ideal experience; you’re
designing the ideal experience for a specific participant. When you use
experience mapping to evaluate an existing experience, you can work
with real participants to build a map that reflects their actual experience.
When using experience maps to design new experiences, you don’t have
actual participants yet, but you can still create participant-focused
experience maps using personas.
   Personas are simply a graphic representation of a participant or a
synthesized representation of multiple participants. To build a persona,
you first need to think about the potential participants of the experience
you’re designing. Traditional marketing approaches used to focus on
target markets built on composite group characteristics. But often, the
resulting “average” person did not represent an actual individual.
Building personas is an attempt to be more grounded; you need to get to
know actual individuals who represent your participant groups. This
knowledge could come from your personal experience with representative
participants, but it’s even better when you can go out to talk with and
observe individuals who fit your participant profile. Jim Kalbach, author of
Mapping Experience, suggests gathering the following types of information
to create a persona:

  • Demographics—This category includes age, gender, ethnicity,
    and any other relevant demographic indicators.
  • Psychographics—Whereas demographics usually deals with
    observable characteristics, psychographics includes less
    observable individual traits like attitudes, beliefs, and aspirations.
  • Relevant behaviors—These are the behaviors or actions (e.g.,
    habits, hobbies, professional activities) with relevance to the
    experience you will be designing.
  • Needs and Pain Points—What are needs you can meet and pains
    you can relieve with the experience you’re designing?5

As mentioned, you can gather this information directly from actual
people, or you can pull from your design team’s experience to create what
Kalbach calls a “proto-persona.”6 Although it’s always preferable to create
personas based on real individuals, proto-personas can serve as a nice
workaround if time and resources are short. In some cases—when
developing a new product, for example—there may be individuals who
have never seen or used the product, so the only potential participant
available is the one you vicariously construct. Either way, you want to
create personas for each distinct participant group you foresee engaging
in your experience.
   Personas are usually no more than page-length descriptions and are
often laid out as a graph. They need to include a name, picture, and short
description of the person (you can use pseudonyms for the purpose of
confidentiality, but personas built with information from real end users
will be the most helpful), along with information from the four
aforementioned areas: demographics, psychographics, relevant behaviors,
and needs and pain points. You will want to display your personas
prominently so that you and your team can refer to them throughout the
design process. It’s common to place a smaller version of a persona
directly on a journey map to keep the process explicitly end-user focused.
Figure 6.1 is a template you can use to create your own personas, though
there really are no specific rules you must follow; the goal is to create a
graphic artifact that will help you keep the participant in your mind’s eye
as you proceed through the design process.
Figure 6.1 The persona template.


   One note of caution is necessary when it comes to the use of personas.
Avoid the pitfall of using personas as the filter through which all
participants are evaluated. Personas can serve as a helpful design tool to
keep you focused on designing for others but are never a replacement for
continuous efforts to empathize with your participants. Yes, you can
reconstruct your personas as you learn more about the participants.


                    Intentionality in Mapping Experiences

Now that you have a few specific personas in mind, you need to think
about what you want these individuals to get out of the experience you’re
designing. Or better yet, ask the people behind your personas what they
want to get out of the experience in question. What results will you need
to target for them within each microexperience so that together these
experiences will culminate in a specific macroexperience outcome?
Thinking carefully about results will help you increase the likelihood that
the experience you design will deliver results you and your participants
value. As you begin to create an experience map, you need to focus on a
few primary macroexperience results. These serve as the end destination
for the experience you’re creating. Once you know where you want to help
your personified participants to go, you’re ready to start thinking about
how to take them there.
    When you are thinking about intentional outcomes, focus on only a few
key effects you want the macroexperience to facilitate for participants.
There is a tendency to try to expand the desired outcomes list to
encompass all possible positive results. We recommend that you keep your
list of targeted outcomes short and focused. If you select too many
outcomes, not only are you likely to lack the resources to achieve them all,
but you are also likely to lack the ability to give each outcome adequate
attention.


                              Touchpoints

At this point you have identified a specific group of participants and a
desired outcome you want your experience to produce. Now it’s time to
think about the microexperiences you’ll need to design and how to
sequence them to create the macroexperience that will lead your
participants on a journey resulting in the outcome. In mapping
vernacular, we refer to microexperiences as touchpoints. A touchpoint
represents a specific time and place during an experience in which a
participant interacts with designed experience elements. Some
touchpoints will be short and others long. Regardless, they represent the
time a participant is actively interacting with the experiencescape
elements you have intentionally orchestrated. The combined, sequential
touchpoints represent the journey your participant will take; they make
up the graphically displayed experience map.
   Although there is no fixed rule regarding how many touchpoints an
experience map should include, you should especially try to account for
all touchpoints that will provide opportunities for participants to be
actively engaged, thereby shaping their perceived outcomes and resulting
memories. You don’t need to account for all the time in an experience
journey. In fact, you probably can’t anyway. The touchpoints you identify
and design represent the interactions that must be present for
participants to have the opportunity to co-create the experience you’ve
envisioned.
   We should note that it’s common for individuals to serendipitously add
touchpoints of their own making along an experience journey. This is fine,
to be expected, and often why accounts differ across individuals
participating in the same experience. Your design should result in
personal narratives of the experience with some commonality, but it’s
okay if there are some individual nuances as well. These are the collateral
outcomes of the experience, and experiences that are well designed are
more likely to produce positive rather than negative outcomes.
   We like to use sticky notes when building experience maps because
they allow for quick and easy building and revising. You can also use
online     collaborative     whiteboard      platforms   like     Mural.co,
Realtimeboard.com, or Lucidchart.com. When you first start identifying
touchpoints, don’t worry too much about sequence. Simply start writing
down potential touchpoints, one per sticky note, and place the notes on
your working surface. If you’re working as a team, posting the sticky notes
on a wall is a great way to get everyone up and moving.
   After your initial effort to generate touchpoints, you can start
arranging the touchpoints sequentially. Using sticky notes facilitates
modifications and additions to your map as it’s developed. As you will
discover, sequence matters, and rearranging touchpoint order can help
you discover new design insights. For example, why not serve the salad
after rather than before the entree? The French do this often so that the
vinegars in the salad do not interfere with the palate’s ability to taste
wine. But doing this would be a novel change in the typical American
dining sequence. As you’re arranging your touchpoints, remember to
consider principles we’ve discussed earlier in the book like the peak-end
rule.7 Make sure you’re intentionally building peaks and making final
touchpoints meaningful.
   Some experiences are not linear and thus give participants freedom to
create and sequence their touchpoints in unique ways. Consider a
community festival. In such an experience, touchpoints do not happen in
the same order for all participants because the festival patrons are free to
wander. In these cases, where a set linear configuration doesn’t exist, you
need to give some thought to which touchpoints are essential for the
success of the overall experience and devise ways to attract patrons to
them. One example would be to highlight the main attractions on a
printed diagram layout given to patrons. Or you could give away a book of
passes or tickets to the main attractions to ensure participation in these
defining touchpoints of the experience. These are among the many things
to consider as you create your experience maps.
   While we recognize that not all experience journeys are linear and that
they may involve branching paths, we recommend that you keep things
simple for your first few maps. Build some straightforward maps first and
then get more ambitious. Also, remember that a full experience map
covers all three experience phases—anticipation, participation, and
reflection—from the moment an individual learns about the experience
until after the experience has ended and he or she begins to tell other
people about it.8


                               Reactions

The next question to consider is, How do you want people to respond to
each touchpoint? Reactions are the primary response an end user will
have to a touchpoint. When identifying touchpoint reactions, remember
that they should align with and contribute to the overall macroexperience
results that are intended. The best experience designers are masters at
orchestrating touchpoints to promote a cohesive, intentional
macroexperience feel.
   Mat is good friends with one such master experience designer, John
Connors, the former vice president of event development for Bigsley
Event House. Bigsley stages The Color Run™ (TCR), which consists of
untimed 5K races in which participants have colored powder thrown on
them. Bigsley leveraged this simple concept into the largest running
series in the world with over five million racers in more than thirty-five
countries participating since their founding in 2012. Needless to say, the
company’s event development team knows how to design unique and
engaging experiences.
   To continually improve the TCR experience, John created what he calls
The Color Run Event Model (see figure 6.2). This simple yet powerful
framework, which draws inspiration from Disney’s mantra “everything
speaks,” is built on four key questions:

   1. What do customers want?
   2. What do you as the experience designer want customers to say?
   3. What is your experience actually saying?
     4. What are customers actually saying?9




Figure 6.2 The Color Run Event Model.


As you design an experience, have some idea of the end user’s needs that
you’re attempting to meet. You must then deduce what you hope people
will say about the experience you’re providing—their reactions to it. Next,
critically examine each touchpoint and its relevant experiencescape
elements to determine whether these touchpoints are “saying” the same
things that you want your participants to say. For example, if you want
your customers to say, “This is a friendly company,” you want to make sure
you’re intentionally doing things to make touchpoints friendly. This might
include ensuring that all employees who will have face-to-face contact
with customers are trained to smile when introducing themselves. Once
you’ve worked to ensure alignment between your desired reactions and
designed touchpoints, you need to listen to what customers are actually
saying about your experience through formal customer feedback channels
or on social media. If they’re saying what you hoped they would say, you
know you’re on the right track; if not, you need to make some changes.
   John wants TCR participants to say, “This is the happiest 5K on the
planet” and “This is a well-run event.”10 These two statements, or
reactions, guide the design and evaluation of all TCR events: Do the online
registration process, the onsite racer-bib pickup, the starting chute
experience, and the color stations all lead people to say, “This is the
happiest 5K on the planet”? If not, TCR makes modification so that
customers are saying what the company wants them to say. A side benefit
of identifying a small number of key reactions is that doing this will
simplify your training process. The overarching directive behind John’s
training of staff, volunteers, and employees is to do whatever it takes,
within reason, to help people say, “This is the happiest 5K on the planet”
and “This is a well-run event.”
   Consider another Disney example. In designing Disneyland, Walt set
out to create the happiest place on earth. One of the things he wanted
people to say about Disneyland was that it is a clean place, in contrast to
the typical amusement park at that time. To ensure that this would be
something people would say, Walt made sure that patrons were never
farther than thirty steps from a trash can. He calculated this number by
figuring out through observation the average number of steps people
would take while holding trash before tossing it aside.11 It may seem like
an insignificant design decision, but it shows the importance of knowing
what you want people to say about your experience and then making sure
you’re designing it, all the way down to the number of available trash
cans, to facilitate that reaction. It takes real discipline to keep focused on
matching touchpoints with intended macroexperience results, but doing
so will enhance the overall quality of the experiences you design.
    To thoroughly implement this process, you need to explicitly state the
types of reactions you want people to have during each touchpoint along
your experience map. These represent the keywords essential to
intentionally designing your experience as well as to interfacing through
the web with customers who are searching for the type of experiences you
are providing. These keywords are the conduit through which niche
customers will find you. These words represent what they are looking for.
    The customer experience team at Oracle suggests that you write these
reactions as specific statements or thoughts your end user will have at
each touchpoint.12 For example, “That was the easiest check-in experience
I’ve ever had” or “The customer service here is incredible.” Write these
reactions on separate sticky notes and place them directly above their
associated touchpoint. It is helpful to use the same color sticky notes for
all touchpoints and a different color for reactions.
    With touchpoints identified and organized along a journey that (1) has
been designed for specific personas and (2) has associated reactions paired
with each touchpoint, you have a complete experience map. A map with
linear touchpoints and end-user reactions represents the most basic of
experience maps. Next we’re going to ask you to think about the resources
needed to implement each touchpoint.


                  Front- and Backstage Contributors

Oracle has created a customer experience outreach division that conducts
free experience-mapping workshops around the world and hosts a
website, Designingcx.com, with some great experience-mapping
resources. Oracle encourages experience designers to think about the
front-stage (i.e., onstage) and backstage contributors associated with each
touchpoint.13 They use theater terminology, which has been employed by
other experience design thinkers like B. Joseph Pine II and James H.
Gilmore,14 to indicate the people and things end users will interact with
during a touchpoint (frontstage) and the people and things they won’t
interact with that are necessary to facilitate the touchpoint (backstage). If
we think of a restaurant experience, frontstage contributors would
include servers, décor, seating arrangements, menus, and food. Backstage
contributors would include the chef and other kitchen staff, systems used
to manage seating assignments, dishwashing, and the supply chain behind
the food prepared in the kitchen.
   You could really dive deep into each of these areas, especially the
backstage contributors, but the key is to focus on the most relevant
contributors for each touchpoint. These are the ones you will need to
control or manage to successfully implement the touchpoint. The other
nice thing about identifying these contributors is that doing so forces you
to think holistically about all the working parts necessary to bring your
experience to life. Because—let’s say it one last time together
—“everything speaks.”
   To add front- and backstage contributors to your map, use differently
colored sticky notes for each and place each note below its respective
touchpoint. It’s also worth noting that some touchpoints won’t have both
front- and backstage contributors. That’s okay; do your best to flesh out
your journey map as much as possible. Don’t worry about including every
possible contributor you can think of; instead, focus on those that are
most salient to the experience and that you have some degree of control
over.


                   Completing the Experience Map
A comprehensive experience map will include touchpoints that span the
anticipation, participation, and reflection phases of the experience, along
with participant reactions and front- and backstage contributors. As you
create an experience map, remember to keep the guiding personas in
mind so that the experience is designed to meet the personas’ identified
needs and desires. It is helpful, remember, to use differently colored sticky
notes for each experience-mapping element. This will help you quickly
navigate and organize your experience map.
   Figure 6.3 provides an example of a simple experience map for a
concert. A real experience map would, of course, include additional
touchpoints, but this one does include all three phases and provides a
visual example of what an experience map would look like. You’ll notice
the reactions are quotes from participants. Notice also that we’ve
identified relevant front- and backstage contributors.




Figure 6.3 Example experience map inspired by Oracle’s experience-mapping resources.
                  Summary: Structuring Experiences

In chapter 4 we looked at the smallest building blocks of
microexperiences, the experiencescape elements. In this chapter, we
zoomed out to look at the macroexperience structure. Although these
dramatic shifts in perspective may seem a bit dizzying, as an experience
designer you must be able to think simultaneously about the minutiae and
the big picture to ensure that all pieces are working harmoniously.
Experience maps are a great way to create a prototype of the experience
you’re designing. It builds structure and helps pull together key elements
into a graphic representation of the experience. As a prototype, it’s also
meant to be modified. This is not a finished product but, rather, the first
draft of a working plan for what your experience might look like. At this
point it’s not something you need to defend to relevant stakeholders;
instead, it’s a tool to solicit feedback from them to make the design better.
   Experience maps will go through multiple iterations as you work
through the experience design process. Your experience maps should also
continue to evolve as you start to provide the experiences they outline.
Once participants start interacting with your designed experiences, you
have gone live and are operating in real time. Keep working at seeing the
experience through their eyes. These insights will allow you to tweak your
experience maps to reflect what is happening on the ground and to make
modifications to continually improve the experience. In this way, the role
of the experience map will transition from a design of what will be to a
representation of the experience as currently provided. An experience
map is a flexible tool that can be used to design, describe, and refine
experiences while also serving as a visual artifact of previously delivered
experiences.
   Now that we’ve covered the steps for developing an aerial view of the
experience journey, it’s time to zoom back to the ground-level view to
focus on individual experience touchpoints and the transitions between
them. The best experience designers are able to seamlessly switch
between the big picture of experience maps and the details of each
touchpoint. They have mastered the ability to intentionally design each
microexperience so that each contributes to a cohesive macroexperience.
In the next chapter we’ll walk you through the process of using the
touchpoint template to design intentional microexperiences.
                                    CHAPTER SEVEN




                Touchpoints and Transitions


IN THE ART Institute of Chicago you will find Georges Seurat’s masterpiece A Sunday on
La Grande Jatte, painted in 1884 (see figure 7.1). Seurat was a postimpressionist painter
who helped develop a technique called pointillism, which involved using small dots of
paint as opposed to more traditional brushstrokes. When viewed up close, pointillist
paintings appear to be a random collection of colored dots, but when you step back, the
dots merge to form a coherent, vibrant image. To create works of art using this
technique, the artist must intentionally place and color each dot to make sure they all
work in harmony to create the desired image.
   An experience journey is like a pointillist painting: it is formed by combining a series
of touchpoints designed to elicit specific reactions and to ultimately achieve the
intended results of the macroexperience. To build an experience out of touchpoints, you
should give each one, in terms of content and placement, the same attention as a master
artist gives to his or her work. It takes time to create quality experiences, just as it takes
time to create great works of art (it took Seurat two years to paint A Sunday on La Grande
Jatte), but your efforts and attention to detail will be rewarded. Luckily, we have a tool
that we think will prove helpful in the design of intentional touchpoints.
Figure 7.1 A Sunday on La Grande Jatte (1884–1886) by Georges Seurat. Courtesy of the Art Institute of Chicago / Art
Resource, New York.



                                       The Touchpoint Template

Think of experience maps as a bird’s-eye view of the full experience journey you’re
designing from beginning to end. They include all the touchpoints needed to produce
the desired results of the experience. Once you have identified and sequenced your
touchpoints, including end-user reactions and front- and backstage contributors, you’re
ready to start working through the design of each.
   To help you accomplish this, we have developed what we call “the touchpoint
template.” This is a one-page model of each experience touchpoint, and it will help you
pull together and apply the topics we’ve covered thus far in the book. The template also
introduces a few additional topics—co-creation, which we will discuss at more length in
this chapter, and technical and artistic factors, which will be covered in chapter 9. In one
of his previously published books, Bob and his coauthor, Barbara Schlatter, have called a
similar technique “framing” and have recommended its use for designing leisure
experiences.1 The version we recommend here expands on this earlier work and
incorporates new content and techniques. Remember, the touchpoint design process,
like almost all aspects of experience design, is iterative, so we recommend that you use a
pencil to complete early versions of the template.
                            Modeling a Microexperience

Each touchpoint template is a model of a microexperience that will contribute to the
intended results of the macroexperience. Each template specifies the interactions that
participants will have with the designed experiencescape elements. As such, the
templates also identify the elements the experience designer will need to have in place
to enable the microexperience to occur. We’ll walk you through a case example shortly,
but first consider the main features of the touchpoint template (see figure 7.2):

  • Sequence Number (where the touchpoint fits within the experience; may change
    as you further refine the experience)
  • Touchpoint Title
  • Experience Type (the type of experience the touchpoint represents, e.g., prosaic
    to transformational)
  • Desired Reaction
  • Desired Results
  • Experiencescape Elements
  • Designed Interactions
  • Contributors
  • Desired Co-creation Level
  • Enhancements (more to come on these in chapter 9)
  • Transition

   As you may have noticed, much of the information you need to complete the template
can be pulled directly from your completed experience map, including the touchpoint
name, the desired reaction(s), and the front- and backstage contributors. We’ve already
covered most of the content you need to know to complete the template aside from co-
creation and technical and artistic factors. We’re going to discuss co-creation shortly,
but we’ll save a more in-depth conversation of experience enhancements for chapter 9.
We’ll first walk you through each section of the template and then provide a few
examples of the template in action.
Figure 7.2 Touchpoint template.


    We recommend that you complete the template in the same order in which we
introduced its components. To guide you through the process, we have numbered each
section in the template to indicate the correct order of completion. When designing
experiences, we start by thinking about desired results, and that’s why this box is first
even though in terms of implementation sequence desired results are last. This is often
called backward design and implements Steven Covey’s famous admonition to “begin
with the end in mind.”2 We have also included the question you need to address in each
section as an italicized subtitle. Before delving into the separate sections, make sure to
fill out the top portion of the template, including the touchpoint number, title, and
experience type, along with the desired end-user reaction you articulated during the
experience-mapping process. It’s easier to get somewhere if you know where you are
going.
    Think of the desired reaction as a rough draft of your desired results. You’ll want to
create results that logically stem from the reaction. You should have one-to-three
desired results for each touchpoint. As you consider possible results, think about the
recommended research-based experience results discussed back in chapter 2. As a
refresher, here are a few of them:

  •   Facilitate positive emotions
  •   Engage attention
  •   Develop and strengthen relationships
  •   Promote competence
  •   Foster freedom to choose

The foregoing list is a great starting point for thinking about potential desired results. At
this point, these generic results can be refined to directly apply to the experience being
designed. When staging a weekend ski clinic, for example, “promote competence” can be
transformed into “participants will improve their ability to complete plow turns.” Also,
remember to keep in mind the importance of matching experience types and desired
results. You can’t produce transformational results with a prosaic touchpoint.
   After determining your desired results, in some instances you may need to divert
from the process order we have specified. Whether the designer should identify
elements of the experiencescape to be used before the interactions necessary to execute
the results desired will vary depending on the experience being designed. For example,
your design problem may be to develop an experience using a specific venue the client
already owns and wants to utilize. In this case, the recommended process order works
fine. Consider, however, the need to create experiences for a cohort of employees with
the desired results of improving esprit de corps and teamwork. In this case, the
interactions necessary to accomplish this would likely receive priority attention and the
experiencescape elements necessary to support the interactions would be identified
after the interactions are designed. In all cases, you want to carefully consider which
experiencescape elements are going to be most essential; it is frequently the case that
one or two of them will receive priority attention in a given template. Identify each
essential element by type and provide a short description.
   When designing the interactions you want to facilitate, be expansive in the
possibilities you consider. For example, there are many interactions that can be
included, among them interactions between your participants and staff, between
participants and experiencescape elements, and between participants. You should have
at least one designed interaction for each desired result. This way you ensure that there
is an intentional causal path to each result desired.
    Remember, it’s not always the case that experiencescape elements are identified
before interactions with them are designed. It is most likely the case that in the design
process you will iterate back and forth between these two essential design details. As
demonstrated, in some cases you will focus on designing interactions first, and in others
you will initially review available or required experiencescape elements and then design
the interactions.
    The fourth section, contributors, asks, “Who and what will make [the designed
interaction] happen?” You will have started answering this question during experience
mapping, so revisit your map to address this question. Note both the front- and
backstage contributors who will be involved in delivering this touchpoint. The
remaining three sections need a bit more introduction. We’re going to devote space in
this chapter to introducing co-creation and transitions, but you’ll have to wait until
chapter 9 for a full treatment of enhancements.


                                     Co-creation

Moviemakers and other media planners use a technique they call “storyboarding” to
plan the sequential order of scenes in a movie as well as to sketch out and note the
critical interactional details of each scene (i.e., blocking the action). The process of
experience mapping is like this process. Both storyboarding and experience mapping
serve the role of sequencing and outlining key stages of the story or experience. One
difference between traditional storyboarding and experience mapping is the role of end
users, your participants. When a screenwriter or a director creates a storyboard, he or
she knows that the actors will adhere to their scripted roles, with perhaps some small
degree of ad-libbing. Experience designers, in contrast, need to recognize that their end
users are participants who will often want to play a more active, co-creative role when
they engage in the designed experience. Remember, Clay Shirky told us that participants
are different than end users; they want to affect outcome. This desire needs to be
anticipated and accounted for in the design.
   In previous chapters we discussed the interactive, co-creative nature of experiences.
Business Dictionary defines co-creation as “a business strategy focusing on customer
experience and interactive relationships. Co-creation allows and encourages a more
active involvement from the customer to create a value rich experience.”3 Since its
inception the concept of co-creation has been a companion piece to discussions about
the experience economy. C. K. Prahalad and Venkat Ramaswamy suggest that before the
experience economy, “customers were [seen as] ‘outside the firm,’” but “consumers now
seek to exercise their influence in every part of the business system…. Consumers want
to interact with firms and thereby ‘co-create’ value.”4 Prahalad and Ramaswamy propose
that companies “need to create … experience environment[s] within which … [end users]
can create their own unique personalized experience.”5
   Be sure to read in chapter 10 the examples of how corporations are developing
keywords and strategies for implementing experiences. Often experiences and their
provision have become elements of corporate strategic planning and are included as
corporate goals and action plans.
   Shirky uses a bar as an example of an experience environment in which customers
co-create value through their participation: “The bar owner is in the same curious
business of offering value above the products and services he sells, value that is created
by the customers for one another.”6 Think of how the interactions between bar patrons
Norm Peterson and Cliff Clavin co-created value in the classic TV series Cheers.7 We are
certain your favorite bar has the same characteristics that made Cheers a favorite.
   Modern consumers don’t want to be handed cookie-cutter products, services, and
experiences; they want to help co-create the products, services, and experiences. This is
especially true of millennials. They want participatory experiences. Bob has just
returned from Buenos Aires, where he and his wife took a cooking class where they
learned how to make empanadas. Also attending the class were a couple and two
millennials who were traveling around the world. Mrs. Norma Soued,8 who conducts the
small-group classes in her lovely condominium in the Palermo neighborhood, told Bob
that many of her participants are single young people traveling around the world
looking for unusual things they can do. Airbnb addressed this desire for authentic and
unique travel experiences by introducing an “Experiences” category in 2017, allowing
people to book experiences like flying in a prop plane or learning how to swallow fire, all
provided by locals.9
   If you recall our discussion of experience phases, you will remember that each
experience has an anticipation, participation, and reflection phase. We find it helpful to
think about co-creation a bit differently within each phase. Drawing from work done by
Mat and his colleague Andrew Lacanienta, we reframe co-creation as co-design during
the anticipation phase, co-actualization during the participation phase, and co-curation
during the reflection phase.10 In other words, think about ways you can invite your end
users to participate in designing (anticipation phase), actualizing (participation phase),
and curating (reflection phase) their experiences.
   As wonderful as co-creation is, you’ll want to manage it. Some touchpoints may have
a lot of co-creation and others not so much. Altering the amount from touchpoint to
touchpoint will shift demands on participants’ energy and attention as the experience
moves through time and will create variety and interest in your macroexperience. Let’s
look briefly at a few examples.
   Co-design is probably the most widely applied strategy because it involves any effort
to involve participants during the anticipation phase. Many companies have strong
customer feedback loop mechanisms, often called voice-of-the-customer systems, to
help gather customer insights and have these insights influence product, service, or
experience development. At the individual level, opportunities for customers to
customize a product or experience before purchase/participation facilitate co-designing
opportunities. When booking a cruise, for example, would-be travelers consider the
options available, such as cabin types, dining plan options, and shore excursion
selections.
   Co-actualization occurs once end users begin to interact with the designed product,
service, or experience and can influence outcomes. Think carefully about which
touchpoints in the participation phase warrant higher levels of co-actualization. Mat’s
father, Verle, made some intentional co-actualization decisions when designing the type
of white-water–rafting experience he wanted his customers to have. Whereas some
outfitters offer full-service trips where passengers’ tents and cots are set up for them
each night, Verle decided that giving all the participants the chance to select and set up
their own campsites would build more group camaraderie. He also decided that guides
would handle all food preparation so that guests could enjoy and explore each campsite.
Verle felt he could provide the best experience with high co-actualization during camp
setup and low co-actualization for meal preparation. There’s no one right way to foster
co-creation; the key is using opportunities for co-creation to help the experience
produce desired outcomes for your participants.
   Co-curation is probably the most overlooked opportunity for co-creation. We often
put so much effort into designing and providing experiences that when they conclude,
we have no energy or plan to intentionally engage with our participants during the
reflection phase. Thinking about co-curation strategies can help you avoid this
oversight. Co-curation can be as simple as sending a follow-up thank-you note or a short
customer feedback survey. More proactive examples of co-curation could involve
strategies to assist participants in the curation of their memories of the experience. The
National Parks Service does this with its park passport and its Junior Ranger program
that encourages patrons to collect stamps, stickers, pins, and ranger badges at each park
they visit. The National Parks Service also sells various books and vests patrons can use
to display their memorabilia, and the books’ blank pages remind them of the parks they
still need to visit.


                                      Affordance

Another topic closely related to co-creation is affordance—the number of different types
of interactions a product or experience offers. A ball, water, and a sandbox are high-
affordance play objects that provide numerous unstructured play opportunities for
children. Contrast these with a low-affordance play object like a windup toy monkey
that plays a drum. Aside from winding up the monkey and watching it play the drum,
there’s not much else a child can do with it, besides break it at some point. The lack of
affordance an object provides limits the degree of co-creation possible. High-affordance
objects usually lead to repeat usage because they provide sustainable experiences. Low-
affordance objects quickly become boring. Think of the toys you played with most as a
child, and you’ll most likely realize they were high on affordance. They provided you
with a lot of play options.
   Affordance is related to customization. High affordance in an experience makes
customization more likely and easier to achieve. There are two strategies for increasing
the affordance of an experience. The first is to build more choices into the experience,
but this approach comes with its own set of problems. There is a limit to the number of
options consumers find useful before they become overwhelmed. Anyone who has
shopped for orange juice has experienced choice overload when perusing orange juice
permutations based on combinations of pulp-processing techniques and nutritional add-
ins. To find the exact combination you want is time consuming. You must carefully read
each label to identify your preferred type. Choices work best when just a few options are
offered and their differences are distinct and recognizable. Simply increasing the
number of choices does not offer customers the customized solution they’re looking for,
and so they end up settling for the closest fit to their needs.11
    The second strategy is to increase the number of options within an experience. One
way to do this is to be less definitive about the function of objects. In the design of
playground equipment, for example, you can choose the degree of specificity. Think
about the animals on springs that children like to ride in playgrounds. You could decide
to design the equipment using a specific animal with a seat—a horse, for instance. Or,
you could put a nondescript seat on the spring, thereby allowing children to use their
imagination to decide whether they are riding an animal or a spaceship. Putting a
specific animal on the spring reduces the affordance of the playground equipment.
    The number of interactive options within an experience or associated with a product
can be increased by good design. Compare a common penknife with a Swiss Army knife.
The former has one or two blades, whereas the latter has blades plus many more tools,
allowing for more uses with the same basic knife configuration. It takes several box
wrenches to equal one crescent wrench, which offers more affordance—it will work on
more than one-size nut.
    Today there is a tendency to use technology as a substitute for human interaction.
The result is experiences and products with decreasing affordance, when the most
desirable outcome is to increase affordance. Because of computer-driven programming,
toy manufacturers can now offer toys with many play options. Here the problem of
affordance is to make sure that the technology creates multiple interactive options for
the child to do something—to be the cause of or participate in an act—rather than
simply to watch the toy operate. Manufacturing a toy monkey with a computer chip that
enables it to play three drum songs rather than one is not implementing useful user-
focused affordance. Designers must use technology to increase affordance for the child,
not to reduce it.
    Another major impediment to affordance is developing rules, regulations, and
management policies that restrict choices. Bob once read a Ziggy cartoon in which Ziggy
was going to a public park. It was so long ago, Bob cannot find the original version to cite
it, but what follows is the gist of the cartoon. Upon arriving in the park Ziggy was
greeted by signs similar to the following: “Keep Off the Grass,” “No Rollerblading,” “Do
Not Walk on the Grass,” “No Swimming,” and finally, “This Is YOUR PARK—Enjoy It—Your
Park Commission!” When you design an experience, every rule you implement restricts
choices and thereby affordance. Keep rules to a minimum, and make sure they enhance
rather than impede the experience.
    Affordance built into an experience by design can solve the problem of customization
because multiple interactive options are present for the customer’s taking. Customers
can interact with the object or in the environment in multiple ways with no other
intervention or provisions needed from the experience designer or stager. The most
popular video games, for example, offer lots of interactive possibilities for the gamer.
Video game designers try hard to build in affordance. But consider this irony: contrast
the affordance available to the person playing the game with the affordance available to
the game designer who is programming the game for the computer. The programmer
has much more affordance than the player. As an experience designer, you need to
develop a sense of how to build affordance into your experiences so that you can build in
multiple interactive possibilities for the participant rather than restricting them.
   Co-creation and affordance are ways to facilitate opportunities for engagement. As
you work through the design of each touchpoint, we encourage you to consider whether
co-creation might help enhance the experience you’re hoping to provide. Remember
also that certain experience types are more conducive to co-creation than others. For
example, prosaic experiences are not usually rich in co-creation or affordance. Section 5
of the touchpoint template addresses co-creation and asks you to indicate with a circle
or dash mark on a high-to-low continuum how much co-creation you want to enable in
the touchpoint. You then can provide brief details on what co-creation will look like for
this touchpoint. This is a great space in which to make notes on how you might increase
affordance for co-created touchpoints.


                                      Transitions

Details make or break experiences. What sets great experience designers apart from
good ones is their attention to detail. We’ve spent this whole chapter discussing details
related to touchpoints, but we still need to consider the space between touchpoints. This
is a space that is often overlooked. We’re talking about transitions—the movement of
people either spatially or cognitively from one touchpoint to another. Touchpoint
transitions aren’t necessarily very interesting, and sometimes they are not needed at all.
This is why they’re often overlooked, but they are the glue that binds an experience
together. Accounting for and designing transitions does not take much time. But the
space between touchpoints should be examined to determine whether a designed
transition is needed. To complete section 7 of the touchpoint template, follow these
steps:
    1. Identify whether the transition is implicit or explicit. Is the transition obvious,
       or does it need additional explanation or direction? For example, you could
       think about each band playing at a music festival as a separate touchpoint. The
       transition between bands is implicit because the audience does not need to be
       instructed to do anything to make the transition happen. A transition is
       explicit if the participants will need instruction on how to move from one
       touchpoint to the next. If you determine that the transition is implicit, you’re
       finished and can move onto the next touchpoint. If it’s explicit, you need to
       complete step 2.
    2. Identify the outcome and intervention associated with the transition. This is
       the same process you completed for the touchpoint. Transitions happen
       quickly, so you need to have only one outcome and one intervention. For
       example, on a recent cruise Bob went to St. Petersburg, Russia. The day began
       onboard ship in the lounge, where groups were assigned to specific buses.
       Then passengers had to move from the ship, through Russian customs, and
       finally onto their waiting bus. The most critical point of this transition was
       going through customs. The cruise staff members, who were not allowed in the
       customs area, did three things to ensure a smooth transition. They released the
       group for each bus together so that the whole cohort began their journey at
       the same time, they had a highly visible staff member stationed at the
       entrance to customs to answer questions and help keep the groups together,
       and another staff member stood at the customs exit to reassemble groups and
       direct them to their waiting bus. Considering they had about 300 people to
       transition, the process went very well.

After completing these steps, you are finished designing the transition. As mentioned, it
doesn’t take much time, but seamless, well-executed transitions clearly communicate to
your participants that this is a well-designed, intentional experience.


      A Touchpoint Template for a New Employee Onboarding Experience

To help you better visualize what the touchpoint template looks like in action, let’s walk
through a short example. To anchor this thought exercise, imagine you are designing a
new onboarding experience for employees in your company. You’ve already created your
experience map and have identified the critical touchpoints and the sequence needed to
welcome and orient new employees. Now you must design each touchpoint in detail.
Similar events fail when designers stop after developing the experience map and do not
give sufficient design attention to each touchpoint.
   For our example, we’re going to look specifically at the touchpoint titled
“registration.” This touchpoint begins when employees walk up to the registration table
and interact with one of your staff members, who will be registering new employees for
the training. As a side note, the new employee’s expectations and mood could have been
influenced by how you conducted the anticipation phase of this experience with a letter,
e-mail, or phone call informing the individual of the employee intake process. Based on
how well you created anticipation and influenced expectations, the new employees
could be excited and looking forward to onboarding; they could simply be neutral, with
no expectations; or they could be dreading the experience. Such is the power of
intentionally designing experience phases.
   Since you have made it this far in the book and know how important the anticipation
phase is, we’ll assume you did a great job preparing employees for the experience. Now
let’s identify the information you need to complete the template and walk you through
the task. Figure 7.3 provides an example of what a completed template would look like.
   What follows is a detailed breakdown of each section of the touchpoint template in
figure 7.3:

                                    TEMPLATE HEADING


  • Touchpoint #3 (The first two touchpoints might involve participants reading
    the e-mail they received informing them of this event and arriving at the event
    location.)
  • Title—Registration
  • Experience Type—You want this to be a mindful experience. There is some
    information your participants need to receive when they register. However, you
    want this to be a quick and easy touchpoint, so it doesn’t need to be memorable.
  • Desired Reaction—When creating the experience map, you identified the
    following reactions for this touchpoint: “These people are friendly,” “I am
    excited to get started working here,” and “I know today’s schedule for training.”
Figure 7.3 Touchpoint template example.


                                          NUMBERED TEMPLATE BOXES


     1. Desired Results—You now need to identify the results necessary to facilitate
        the desired reactions and then pinpoint the interventions that will produce
        these results. Here are some examples that are applicable to this touchpoint:
        • Employee feels welcomed.
        • Employee will have all necessary information to participate in the training.
        • Employee will have all his or her questions answered and be ready to
           participate in the training.
     2. Experiencescape Elements—Although all elements will be present in each
        touchpoint, some are usually more salient than others to creating the intended
        reaction(s), and these should be the focus of your design. You will be able to
        pull some of this information from the front- and backstage contributor
        section (section 4) of the touchpoint template. Here’s our perspective on the
   salience of each experiencescape element for this touchpoint (we’ve bolded
   the elements we feel are most salient for this touchpoint) along with some
   preliminary designed-interaction thoughts:
   • People—This includes the new employees, the registration staff, and their
      interactions with each other. You can also think about people who influence
      the touchpoint but are not present, like the new employees’ supervisors; the
      new employees’ families, who are probably excited for them to start a new
      job; or the company’s human resources (HR) team who designed the
      training. Registration is a straightforward educational experience
      touchpoint within this training experience, so we’re going to keep it simple.
   • Place—Because one of the desired reactions is “these people are friendly,”
      you want the registration space to have a friendly feeling. To design this
      element, you would visualize walking through the place and evaluate it
      using the five senses to think of things you could do to make it contribute to
      the desired reaction. For example, the registration area should have good
      lighting and look professional.
   • Objects—The key objects for this touchpoint are the training packets to be
      distributed to employees and the signs indicating that this is the
      registration area. There should be a conspicuous welcome sign, and if there
      is an important corporate logo or saying, such as a value statement or
      mission statement, it should be posted as well.
   • Rules—This is a straightforward touchpoint. General rules of public
      decorum and civility apply, so we don’t need to explicitly focus on them.
   • Relationships—We know that these individuals are new employees who
      most likely don’t have pre-existing relationships with current employees.
      Relationship building can be accomplished in several ways. You can have
      current employees or supervisors from the divisions involved come to
      welcome new employees. Or you can create mechanisms for the new hires
      to get acquainted so that they feel as if they know a colleague.
   • Blocking—This simple touchpoint requires minimal blocking. The signage
      will direct people to the registration and training areas, and the training
      packets will explain the schedule for the rest of the day.
3. Designed Interactions—This is where you decide how to intentionally
   orchestrate the key experiencescape elements to produce the desired results:
   • Staff member will greet all employees by name with a smile and a
      handshake. If you really want a “wow,” get registration staff to look at
      pictures of the new employees to become sufficient familiar to greet them
      by name when they arrive.
   • Employee receives a training packet with a schedule and curriculum.
   • Staff member will briefly explain the schedule and ask if the employee has
      any additional questions.
4. Contributors—For this touchpoint, the following contributors (people and
   things) were identified:
   • Frontstage—The staff running the registration table and the training
      packets, which include a schedule and the training curriculum.
   • Backstage—The HR team who developed the training packet materials and
      trained the registration table staff.
5. Co-creation—You decide that this touchpoint could benefit from a degree of
   co-creation to help facilitate the reaction of “I’m excited to start working
   here.” Accordingly, you make a mark on the co-creation high-to-low
   continuum and then start thinking about how to create opportunities for
   increased co-creation. Let’s consider how name tags might be an opportunity
   for co-creation in this touchpoint. You could have preprinted, professional-
   looking name tags for attendees, or you could allow attendees to create their
   own IDs. Although this may seem to be a minor detail, how you handle it will
   send different messages. Premade name tags would help reinforce the
   professional nature of the workplace, whereas allowing people to create their
   own may provide an opportunity to break the ice and help people express their
   personality. You could even provide supplies for people to customize their
   name tags with the promise of awards for the best-designed name tags. Make
   sure the intervention aligns with the intended results. We hope this example
   shows you how co-creation can add energy and increase engagement in almost
   any touchpoint. You can also see how your ideas about co-creation may cause
   you to go back to modify some of your designed interactions, and that’s
   perfectly okay. Design is an iterative process based on insights gained as you
   visualize and then stage the planned experience.
6. Enhancements—There are many things you can do to enhance the overall
   experience. More to come on these in chapter 9.
   7. Transition—Because the transition to the next touchpoint involves employees
      walking to a different location, you decide that an explicit transition is needed.
      The desired outcome is that “the new employee arrives at the training room on
      time.” The intervention is that “registration staff member provides directions
      to the training room and reminds the new employee about when the first
      session starts.”

   There you have it, the touchpoint template in action. After completing the templates
for each touchpoint along a journey, you will have a very clear idea of what you want to
have happen and how you’re going to stage the experience. You’ll also have a written
plan that can be shared with others—few experiences are staged by one person. The
collection of touchpoint templates that make up the macroexperience enables you to
share the experience plan with the staging team, making sure there is clear
communication about the experience and the role each team member will play. Think of
the experience map as a roadmap to your desired destination, and your touchpoint
templates as detailed directions about how to get there. To provide you with another
example of the touchpoint template in action, in chapter 10 we’ve included completed
touchpoint templates for a product-driven experience.


               Summary: A Comprehensive Experience Prototype

By implementing the recommended processes of experience mapping and touchpoint
design, you will have in your possession a detailed design and staging plan for your
experience. You will have carefully thought about your participants, how you want them
to proceed through and react to each aspect of your experience, and how to turn them
into co-creators. You will have created a prototype for the experience you hope to
provide. You can now test it further or wait to embellish it with two additional sets of
techniques we will introduce in chapters 8 and 9.
   Before we wrap up this chapter, we want to suggest one other possible application for
experience maps and touchpoint templates. We have discussed their use in this book
primarily for design purposes, but experience maps and touchpoint templates can also
be used to deconstruct existing experiences. We encourage you to take an experience
you already provide and create an experience map and corresponding touchpoint
templates to help you better understand what your experience offering currently looks
like. We promise that you’ll gain some interesting insights that will help you identify
areas ripe for redesign and improvement. Sometimes deconstructing experiences is the
first step in making them better. We think the oft-quoted statement attributed to Pablo
Picasso that “every act of creation is first an act of destruction” applies well to
redesigning existing experiences and believe that using experience maps and touchpoint
templates will help you more effectively engage in this process.
   With an experience map in hand, you are one step closer to staging an experience for
your intended participants. It’s important to recognize that by offering an experience to
others, you are in essence inviting them to embark on a journey you have designed for
them. Journeys, of many shapes and sizes, form the structure of almost all stories.
Accordingly, experience designers should recognize and embrace their role as
experiential storytellers. In the next chapter we’re going to take a deep dive into the
world of storytelling to show you why you need to think like a storyteller when
designing experiences.
                              PART THREE




          Creating Great Experiences

                      Enhancements and Examples




YOU NOW UNDERSTAND experiences as unique behavioral phenomena
and have learned how to design them at the macro- and microexperience
levels. In this section, we add to your experience design skillset with more
techniques to enhance your designing abilities and the experience designs
that result. We first look at the role storytelling can play in experience
design and how you can build experience narratives to make your
participants heroes. Then we discuss various technical and artistic factors
you may consider applying to enhance your experience designs. We then
conclude with a chapter demonstrating how experience design can be
used to guide product development and how it is currently used to inform
corporate strategies in several leading businesses.
                            CHAPTER EIGHT




                 The Stories We Tell

                  Building Drama in Your Experiences



  “It was the best of times, it was the worst of times …”1
  “In a hole in the ground there lived a hobbit.”2
  “A long time ago in a galaxy far, far away …”3

EVERYONE LOVES A good story. We enjoy being drawn into stories
populated with interesting characters we come to care about or despise.
Stories provide access to interesting places and people. They evoke
emotion. They teach us about ourselves. They help us see the world in
new ways. Great stories draw us in and lead us on a journey filled with
new and unexpected elements. Certain stories resonate with each of us on
a personal level. Mat loves Peace Like a River and To Kill a Mockingbird,
among others. Bob’s favorites include The Hunt for Red October and
Huckleberry Finn.
   In a world where experiences matter, people are expecting more than a
transactional relationship with companies. C. K. Prahalad and Venkat
Ramaswamy, business professors at the University of Michigan, suggest
that companies need to create experience environments for their
customers to engage in rather than just providing prepackaged goods and
services.4 People want experiences with beginnings, middles, and endings.
They want experiences that place them as actors in compelling stories
that lead them on journeys toward desirable end destinations.
   There are multiple mediums through which stories are told, including
the written word, oral storytelling, movies, and plays. Experiences are also
a storytelling medium. Although designing and delivering experiences is
not always described as a storytelling process, we think it should be. The
best experiences offer participants a chance to play a participatory role in
an unfolding story. Do you know what type of story your experiences are
telling your customers?
   We want to introduce you to some ideas from the world of storytelling
that can help you design more compelling experiences. In this chapter,
we’re going to discuss several storytelling topics, including why stories
matter, the power of the narrative structure, how to make your end users
heroes, and the role of backstories in experience design. Let’s get started.
It was a dark and stormy night … just kidding!


                          Why Stories Matter

In her book The Power of Meaning: Creating a Life That Matters, Emily
Esfahani Smith makes the case for four primary sources of meaning in our
lives: “belonging, purpose, storytelling, and transcendence.”5 Smith
explains why storytelling makes the cut:

  Our storytelling impulse emerges from a deep-seated need all
  humans share: the need to make sense of the world. We have a
  primal desire to impose order on disorder—to find the signal in the
  noise…. We are constantly taking pieces of information and adding a
  layer of meaning to them; we couldn’t function otherwise. Stories
  help us make sense of the world and our place it.6

People are already primed to tell stories about themselves and others, to
tell about the experiences they have, so why not intentionally structure
the experiences you design around stories? Remember The Color Run
Event Model introduced in chapter 6? Step 2 in the model asks, “What do
you want customers to say?” Another way to phrase this question is,
“What stories do you want customers to tell about your experience?”
   Brian Solis describes the moment customers start telling other people
stories about their experiences as the ultimate moment of truth.7 This
retelling to others of what happened during the experience represents the
culmination of the participants’ experience journey and your design
journey. The stories that people tell others about the experiences you
provide have a profound influence on the life cycle of your experiences. In
a world where one customer’s story can potentially reach thousands and
even millions through social media, you need to proactively and
intentionally ensure that your designed experiences tell their own
compelling stories.
   A cynic might see this suggestion as license for manipulating people
into parroting a prepackaged message, but this is not the case. The
experience economy has ushered in an era of high experience literacy. If
your experiences allow for co-creation, each participant will have had a
slightly different experience. When we defined experiences in chapter 1,
we explained that experiences arise out of interactions between
participants and the designed elements of the experience. Customers are
usually quick to recognize experiences that seem forced or unauthentic.
The best experience designers use authentic stories that resonate with
participants to guide the design of their macroexperiences.
   Have you ever made a piñata or other papier-mâché creation? Piñata-
making skills are not a prerequisite for being an experience designer, but
the process does provide a helpful analogy for how stories can help shape
experiences. To build a piñata you create a framework, on which you
drape and wrap strips of paper that have been dipped into a mixture of
glue and water or flour and water. Although the framework is eventually
covered by paper, the framework is what gives the piñata shape and
meaning. Imagine that instead of a piñata at your child’s birthday party
you simply had a pile of wet strips of papier-mâché. This would evoke
many reactions different than those you would expect if you had an actual
piñata. A pile of papier-mâché is going to elicit reactions like “Gross,
what’s that?” A real piñata, in contrast, will elicit reactions like “Look, it’s
a cowboy!” or “Cool, it’s a rocket ship!” The framework covered with
paper creates a structure that tells a story.
   Narrative frameworks for experiences provide form and convey
meaning to your end users, much as cardboard frameworks for piñatas
provide form and convey meaning to kids at birthday parties. Think of an
experience map as a long strip of papier-mâché. As it lies there flat on the
table, uniform and two-dimensional, it doesn’t engender much excitement
for the experience it’s outlining. But if we have a story to wrap that
experience map around, it becomes three-dimensional. It has form and
structure that invites curiosity and guided interpretation.
   Great stories make great experiences. They are what differentiate a
generic amusement park from a Disney theme park. Strip the stories away
from Disneyland or Disneyworld, and the magic is gone. The stories and
the attention given to making them come to life is why Disney theme
parks are unique. Everything about these parks is built on stories that
people already know. People watch Disney movies and then go to Disney
theme parks to experience attractions that immerse them in these same
stories. No one had any idea what Walt Disney was trying to do when he
started talking about building Disneyland. Devin Leonard and Christopher
Palmeri, in an article about Disney theme parks for Bloomberg Businessweek,
wrote about the difficulty that Walt Disney had in trying to explain his
vision for story-driven experiences:

  When Walt Disney set out to create Disneyland in the early 1950s,
  the modern theme park didn’t exist. There were plenty of roadside
  attractions with roller coasters and Ferris wheels, but what Disney
  had in mind was so radical he had trouble articulating it to
  consultants and bankers. Even his wife thought he was crazy.
  “Nobody really knew what he was talking about,” says Margaret
  King, director of the Center for Cultural Studies & Analysis, a firm in
  Philadelphia that has done park research for Disney and SeaWorld
  Entertainment Inc. “The closest he could come was to say that he
  was going to try to sort of cast his films in 3D form, so it was a movie
  you could walk around in.”8

Disney was trying to tell people he was going to design experiences built
on well-known stories, but no one had done something like that before. It
obviously turned out to be a good idea.
   Although Disney has long held the lion’s share of the market when it
comes to theme parks, Universal Studios gained ground on Disney with
the opening of The Wizarding World of Harry Potter in its Orlando theme
park. Universal Studios recognized that the company needed its own
broadly recognized stories to compete with Disney in the theme-park
space. The richness and fidelity of the experience provided in The
Wizarding World of Harry Potter when it opened in 2010 boosted
attendance to Universal Studios by almost 70 percent.9 As Leonard and
Palmeri discuss in their article, Disney and Universal Studios are locked in
a fierce theme-park market-share battle in which billions of dollars are at
stake.10 This contest between two very powerful organizations is pertinent
to our discussion in this chapter because at its core is a fight over stories
and who owns the rights to bring them to life as immersive experiences.
   Universal Studios has cut into Disney’s theme-park dominance using
the power of Harry Potter. Disney is readying a narrative counterstrike
with the opening of new lands at Disney World and Disneyland built on
the stories of Avatar and Star Wars, respectively. This clash of corporate
titans powerfully illustrates the importance of stories in designing
experiences. Although you’re not likely in the position to purchase the
rights to Harry Potter stories to frame your next experience, it doesn’t
mean you can’t use storytelling to enrich your design process. Stories
provide rich, already familiar contexts in which you can design
experiences. Using pre-existing stories can serve as an excellent starting
point for designing experiences, but so too can using the standard
narrative framework that undergirds almost all stories.


                           Dramatic Structure

For some of you, this discussion might seem like a flashback to a ninth-
grade English class, but stick with us because your ninth-grade English
teacher unknowingly held the key to some great experience design
insights. In 1863 Gustav Freytag, a German novelist, wrote Die Technik des
Dramas, in which he proposed the following five phases of traditional
stories: exposition, rising action, climax, falling action, dénouement.11
Although there are, of course, stories that don’t follow this structure,
many do. We also think that Freytag’s five phases of dramatic structure
provide an excellent experience design rubric. If you reflect on some of
the best experiences you’ve had, they can probably be broken down into
these five phases. As an example, let’s examine how we could use Freytag’s
five phases to analyze a cruise experience. Table 8.1 provides a definition
for each phase along with an example of how you could use it to
deconstruct a cruise ship experience.
   As you build experience maps, keep Freytag’s five phases in mind. Are
you creating experiences that give sufficient attention to each of the five
phases? Do you have a climax touchpoint? Do you provide an adequate
and satisfactory resolution? The five phases are a great measuring stick
with which to judge the robustness of the experiences you’re designing.
Although each experience is unique, using these five phases across all
your experiences can help you build additional drama into your
experiences and thereby elicit more participant interest and engagement.
Thinking of your participants as characters within stories you are creating
can be a powerful change in thinking for you as an experience designer.
Just as theme-park designers want to create immersive, story-driven
experiences for patrons, you too should strive to create immersive
experiences for your participants. In fact, you might even consider
making them the heroes of the story.

TABLE 8.1
Five Phases of Dramatic Structure

Phase        Description                              Example

Exposition   The introduction where all necessary     Booking the cruise and receiving
               information about the setting,           information about the cruise along with
               characters, and so on is shared with     the onboarding and orientation process
               the audience
Rising       All events that lead up to the climax.   The bulk of your cruise experience (e.g.,
  Action       This phase tends to be the longest       onboard activities, dining, shore
                  part of a story.                          excursions)
Climax          The moment to which the story has         Most cruises have one or two highlight
                  been building, often a turning            experiences. This could be a formal
                  point for good or bad depending on        dinner or ball on the last night, or a
                  the type of story                         signature port of call.
Falling         The story begins to wrap up as the        This phase includes returning to the home
  Action          impact of the climax plays out.           port and disembarking.
Dénouement      The final resolution if the story is a    You return home from the cruise and back
                  comedy, or the final fall if it’s a       to your regular life laden with memories
                  tragedy                                   and memorabilia to share with family
                                                            and friends.

Source: Gustav Freytag, Freytag’s Technique of the Drama: An Exposition of Dramatic Composition and Art,
trans. Elias J. MacEwan (Chicago: S. C. Griggs, 1895).




                                    The Hero’s Journey

As previously discussed in this chapter, humans are hardwired to think
narratively. In his seminal work The Hero with a Thousand Faces, the
mythologist Joseph Campbell proposed that stories across time and
cultures share a similar structure.12 He used the term monomyth to suggest
that all stories have their origins in one common myth or narrative
structure, which he called “the hero’s journey.” Chris Vogler, while
working on story development at Disney studios in the 1980s, synthesized
Joseph Campbell’s work into a seven-page white paper that became widely
read throughout the screenwriting world and remains influential today.13
   George Lucas was a disciple of Campbell and has talked about how he
intentionally used the hero’s journey to craft the narrative for Star Wars.14
When you review the phases of the hero’s journey, it quickly becomes
apparent that almost any story you can think of, from comedy to tragedy
to children’s bedtime stories, fits into its structure. Table 8.2 provides an
overview of the twelve steps of the hero’s journey as summarized by
Vogler. To show a contemporary example of how the hero’s journey pops
up everywhere, in the second column we include a descriptive narrative of
Google’s Super Bowl ad entitled “Parisian Love.”15
   As you think about the steps shown in table 8.2, what stories come to
mind? We’ve already mentioned Star Wars, so you can’t count that one.
Some other easy ones include The Lord of the Rings and all the Marvel
movies. Try out this little challenge to test Campbell’s claim: Think of the
last movie you watched or novel you read and analyze how well it lines up
with these steps. Not all stories fit perfectly, but almost any story you can
think of will exhibit elements of the hero’s journey.
   What does this have to do with experience design? Everything, we
think. The hero’s journey gives you a template to design experiences in
which your participants become the heroes. Again, you don’t have to
cover every step of the journey in the experience you’re designing. But
when designing your experiences, doesn’t it make sense to use a
framework that for thousands of years has served as the structure for
stories?
   What does this look like in practice? Consider the ad “Parisian Love,”
which we broke down in table 8.2. It is a great example of a complete
hero’s journey told in only fifty-two seconds. What’s even more amazing is
that the only thing you see during the entire ad is the Google search
engine in action, with some accompanying sound effects and barely
audible dialog. Despite these constraints, you still experience the
unfolding of a compelling heroic journey in under a minute. The URL for
the ad is included in the endnotes for this chapter, so you can check it out
yourself. We’re confident that you can find ways to weave the hero’s
journey into your designed experiences. At a minimum, thinking about
your participants as heroes helps you remember that you’re designing the
experiences to meet their needs, not your own. We encourage you to use
the hero’s journey framework in your own experience design work. We
feel confident that doing so will lead you to some interesting perspectives
as you do your work.

TABLE 8.2
Steps of the Hero’s Journey

Phases           Description                            Example

The Ordinary     The hero, uneasy, uncomfortable, or    We meet the hero as he searches the
  World            unaware, is introduced                internet using Google.
                   sympathetically so that the
                   audience can identify with the
                   situation or dilemma.
The Call to      Something shakes up the situation—     The hero searches about study abroad
  Adventure        the hero must face the                 programs in Paris.
                   beginnings of change.
Refusal of the   The hero feels the fear of the
  Call             unknown and tries to turn away
                   from the adventure.
Meeting with     The hero comes across a seasoned       The mentor in this story is the Google
 the Mentor        traveler of the world who gives        search engine that provides the hero
                   him or her training, equipment,        with important information and
                   or advice that will help on the        encouragement to embark on an
                   journey.                               adventure to Paris.
Crossing the     The hero commits to leaving the        You hear the sounds of an airport and
  Threshold        Ordinary World and entering a          planes taking off, which signals that the
                   new region with unfamiliar rules       hero has heeded the call to adventure.
                   and values.
Tests, Allies,   The hero is tested and sorts out       Over the next twenty seconds, the hero
  and Enemies      allegiances in the Special World.      faces a series of challenges (e.g.,
                                                          language barriers, searching for a gift)
                                                          involved in courting a Parisian girl. His
                                                          wise mentor, the Google search engine,
                                                          helps him navigate these challenges.
Approach         The hero and his or her newfound       We see the hero, now having fallen in
                   allies prepare for the major           love, searching for tips about long-
                   challenge in the Special World.        distance relationships.
The Ordeal       Near the middle of the story, the      The searching shifts to focus on finding
                   hero enters a central space in the     jobs in Paris and booking a flight back
                   Special World and confronts            to Paris.
                   death or faces his or her greatest
                   fear. Out of the moment of death
                   comes a new life.
The Reward       The hero takes possession of the       The hero, now back in Paris, searches for
                   treasure won by facing death.          churches in Paris and we hear wedding
                    There may be celebration, but          bells in the background.
                    there is also danger of losing the
                    treasure again.
The Road Back     About three-fourths of the way
                    through the story, the hero is
                    driven to complete the adventure
                    and to leave the Special World to
                    be sure the treasure is brought
                    home.
The               At the climax, the hero is severely    The hero has become a married man
  Resurrection      tested once more on the                living in Paris.
                    threshold of home. He or she is
                    purified by a last sacrifice,
                    another moment of death and
                    rebirth, but on a higher and more
                    complete level.
Return with       The hero returns home, bearing         The hero’s final Google search is “how to
  the Elixir        some element of the treasure that      assemble a crib,” and we hear a baby
                    has the power to transform the         crying in the background.
                    world just as the hero has been
                    transformed.

Source: Christopher Vogler, “A Practical Guide to Joseph Campbell’s The Hero with a Thousand Faces,”
The             Writer’s             Journey,             1985,             para.             2–13,
http://www.thewritersjourney.com/hero%27s_journey.htm#Memo.



                              Front Story or Backstory?

When you read a book or watch a play or movie, what you are
experiencing is the front story. This is the part of the story the novelist,
screenwriter, or playwright shares with you, the audience. It is the story
that leads you through the five dramatic phases. In almost all instances,
there is also an untold backstory behind the front story. The backstory
consists of all the stories and information that support the front story.
Authors will often have extensive backstory descriptions of characters and
settings that they draw on to create the front story. Backstories are
sometimes revealed when authors are interviewed about their work and
are asked questions about characters or plots. In some instances,
backstories later become front stories. These are called origin stories, a
staple element of most superhero movies.
   If backstories are such a helpful tool for writers as they create rich
stories, it seems reasonable to suggest that backstories could also help in
the design of experiences. You don’t have to look too hard to find
examples of experience designers using backstories to create experiences.
As we’ve already discussed in this chapter, Disney’s theme parks and
Universal Studios’ Wizarding World are successful because of their
backstories. Sometimes a backstory can be as simple as a well-established
theme (e.g., holidays, pirates, medieval times) that allows participants to
immediately bring their memories of previous encounters with the theme
into the experience you’ve designed.16
   Backstories can act as a facilitating constraint for experience designers.
Let us explain what we mean with this counterintuitive phrase,
“facilitating constraint.”17 Designing experiences is a creative act, one you
should initially approach with an open mind regarding the potential
directions the process might take you; the limitless options they facilitate
can quickly feel overwhelming. Luckily, you usually have some externally
imposed constraints such as a preselected target audience, a budget, or a
venue; one or more of these preset conditions will limit your options.
These constraints help narrow the feasible options and help you focus the
design process on what is practically possible. Constraints can impede
innovation if too much focus is placed on them early in the design process,
but adding facilitating constraints such as themes and backstories as your
initial design emerges can be helpful. Let us share a few real-world
examples to demonstrate what we mean.


                The Polynesian Cultural Center Story
The Polynesian Cultural Center (PCC) in Laie, Hawaii, is one of the top
tourist attractions on the island of Oahu.18 The PCC’s forty-two acres are
divided into eight areas, each focusing on a different Polynesian island. In
2015, the PCC finished a seven-year renovation project. Part of this project
includes a new area called the Hukilau Marketplace with shops paying
homage to the early history and culture of the local community.19 Mike
Lee, president of MLD Worldwide, the design firm that oversaw the entire
PCC renovation project from 2008 to 2015, cited the creation of backstories
as a key step in designing the marketplace.20 The design of each shop was
guided by a detailed backstory about 1950s life in Laie.


                             The IKEA Story

Another example of an experience design backstory comes from IKEA. As
you probably already know, shopping at IKEA is very different from most
shopping experiences. The IKEA experience involves not only the build-it-
yourself nature of the furniture but also a unique customer journey. When
you visit an IKEA store, instead of walking up and down aisles of
merchandise you embark on a journey through fully furnished living
rooms, dining rooms, kitchens, and bathrooms. Doing this almost gives
you the feeling that you’re walking through someone’s house, and in a
way, you are.
   When IKEA designers create the layouts for their showrooms, they
often create backstories about the families who “live” there.21 These
backstories include details about who lives in each room, what they do for
work, and what hobbies they enjoy. The richness of these backstories
helps the designers create spaces that feel authentic because they have
been designed to reflect the personality of their fictional occupants. IKEA’s
designers have done an excellent job of creating personas of these
individuals.
   We encourage you to consider creating a backstory the next time you
set out to design an experience. Take time to think about the story behind
the experience you’re designing. Scott Lukas, in his book The Immersive
Worlds Handbook, details the process whereby tangible immersive worlds
like theme parks and restaurants are designed.22 When you write a
backstory to kick-start your design process, you are creating an intangible
world that will provide a context for your experience. The backstory is the
unspoken story from which rich experiences emerge.


                          Summary: The End

The story—that is, chapter 8—is now ending. We’ve covered a lot of
content, from Avatar to IKEA showrooms. We feel strongly about stories.
Great experiences are often built on great stories. We encourage you to
embrace the role of storyteller as you design experiences. What stories do
you want to tell your participants? What stories do you want your
participants to tell others? Doing this well will make you an experience
design hero. Stories provide useful drama for the experiences you will
create. Sometimes using a pre-existing story line will get you out of a
thinking block and get you moving forward again, even if you do not use
the story that got you started.
   We’ve come a long way since chapter 1, but we have a few more topics
to cover before we’re done. If we were to compare the progress we’ve
made to this point to the act of making a cake, our freshly baked cake
would be cooling on the counter and we would be ready for frosting and
decorating—the final touches. In the next chapter we discuss the technical
and artistic factors you need to consider as you finalize your experience
designs.
                             CHAPTER NINE




           Techniques for Enhancing
                 Experiences


AS MENTIONED AT the conclusion of chapter 8, designing experiences
bears similarities to making a cake. Both processes involve steps that must
be completed in the correct order. To make a cake, you mix the batter,
bake the cake, and then decorate it. For many people, the most engaging
and rewarding aspect of the process—aside from eating the cake, of course
—is frosting and decorating. The cake serves as the canvas on which you
give expression to your creativity. The decorative adornments of a cake
are what people initially see and respond to. These decorations are why so
many people watch cake and cupcake competitions on TV—they want to
see the amazing creations of expert bakers.
   Even though many bakers may admit a preference for the decoration
phase of cake making, they would not discount the importance of creating
a moist, delicious cake as the foundational act of making a cake. Although
an externally beautiful cake makes a great initial impression, positive
feelings about the cake would quickly dissipate if it tasted awful. Making a
great cake requires fully engaging in all the necessary steps, from mixing
ingredients to baking the cake to placing the last carefully crafted fondant
cake topper.
   When designing experiences, you may also be tempted to jump right
into working on the types of finishing touches we’re introducing in this
chapter. We like to call these experience enhancements; they’re analogous
to the frosting and decorating stages of making a cake. When correctly
applied, they can make an ordinary experience or an ordinary cake
extraordinary, but only if the underlying experience or cake is high
quality to begin with. So, remember this analogy as we discuss enhancing
experiences. If you follow the process of experience design thinking laid
out in a previous chapter and diligently follow the other tools in the
experience designer’s toolkit, you will design excellent experiences. Yes,
doing this takes time and attention, but it’s worth it. This is what people
who design great experiences do. After you move through the ideation,
prototyping, and testing phases, you should then start thinking about
adding the enhancements discussed in this chapter. If you do so, you will
be rewarded with an experience that not only looks great but delivers
desired outcomes as well.
   This chapter also represents a transition of sorts from designing
experiences to delivering them. Great experiences require both great
design and great delivery. An amazing experience design can quickly
become meaningless if the delivery is poor. In the academic literature, we
call the match between experience design and delivery “implementation
fidelity.”1 High implementation fidelity indicates the experience was
delivered as designed; low implementation fidelity signals there were
delivery gaps. Although the topic of experience delivery deserves its own
standalone book, we believe this chapter is a good start to thinking about
things you need to consider as you design experiences and prepare to
deliver them.
   Using figure skating, the work of B. Joseph Pine II and James H.
Gilmore,2 and various other customer service thinkers like
Anantharanthan Parasuraman, Valarie Zeithaml, and Leonard L. Berry,3
Bob worked with Gary Ellis to create a two-category experience-
enhancements framework.4 They described this framework as follows:

  In figure skating, judges evaluate the extent to which competitors
  execute specific skills correctly—technical performance. And, in a
  separate evaluation, they rate the competitors’ creativity, beauty,
  and musical interpretation, for example, artistic performance.
  Consistent with that metaphor, the “technical performance” of
  professionals can be distinguished from their “artistic performance”
  in staging an encounter.5

The following sections provide an overview of selected technical and
artistic factors. We realize that each section could be much longer, but not
all permutations can be covered in a chapter.


                            Technical Factors

When you participate in an experience, you usually have a set of baseline
expectations. For example, you expect the venue to be clean, the frontline
staff to be courteous, and signage to be clear and informative. There are
certain factors you expect to be properly executed; these are the technical
factors, and they must be executed well or they will detract from your
main purpose of providing a quality macroexperience. In the more
common vernacular, technical factors are often referred to as the service
elements of an experience. Merriam-Webster defines service as “useful labor
that does not produce a tangible commodity.”6 A common favorite
example of bad service is the Department of Motor Vehicles (DMV). The
product you receive as a result of visiting the DMV, a driver’s license, is
satisfactory, but what you experience while obtaining it is often less than
desirable. DMVs, probably because they operate as a monopoly, do not
always pay adequate attention to the technical factors of the experience
they offer. Most organizations cannot operate as a monopoly and are
consequently likely to lose business if they provide poor experiences.
   In the following sections, we will introduce the technical service factors
most often associated with high-quality experiences (see table 9.1). These
factors are drawn from a service-quality framework developed by
Parasuraman and his colleagues.7 Not all technical factors will be
applicable for all experiences, so you will need to determine which are
most important for the experiences you’re designing.
   You will notice that many of the technical factors listed in table 9.1
directly involve front-stage employees and the service attributes of an
experience. As explained in our discussion of front- and backstage
contributors in chapter 6, front-stage employees directly interact with
end users. A front-stage employee can often singlehandedly redeem or
derail an experience, depending on how the employee engages with
participants. Although the technical factors we’ll discuss are things you’ve
probably thought about before, we believe that pulling all the elements
together in one framework promotes systematic reflection on each
element as you design and deliver an experience. Consider table 9.1 as a
checklist for the technical or service delivery elements that serve as the
foundation for high-quality experiences. We realize that each of these
topics involves much more than we can include in this book, so we have
focused on overviews and in some cases on errors we believe are made
frequently.

TABLE 9.1
Technical Factors Adapted in Part From Parasuraman, Zeithaml, and Berry

Communication      Necessary information about the experience is clearly communicated to end
                     users.
Competence         Experience stagers have the requisite knowledge and skill to deliver the
                     experience.
Courtesy           Experience stagers have a professional appearance and interact with
                     participants in a professional manner.
Credibility        Experience stagers are perceived as trustworthy.
Recovery           Experience stagers can recover from an experience delivery error.
Reliability        The experience is delivered in a consistent and expected manner.
Responsiveness     Participant needs are quickly addressed.
Security           Customers feel emotionally and physically safe during the experience.
Tangibles          The physical elements of the experiencescape are high quality.

Source: Anantharanthan Parasuraman, Valarie A. Zeithaml, and Leonard L. Berry, “Servqual: A
Multiple-Item Scale for Measuring Consumer Perceptions,” Journal of Retailing 64, no. 1 (1988): 12.



                                     Communication

Effective communication with participants is making sure you tell them
enough to make their experience seamless but not so much that they
become overwhelmed. Effective communication is not necessarily more
communication, though often more communication is the solution to
perceived communication problems. The test is, Did people understand
what they need to know at this point in the experience? A general
solution to this problem is to apportion the information on a need-to-
know basis so that all the information is not given at one time. To help you
know when to provide specific information, make communication content
and delivery an element of your experience map and touchpoint
templates. This can help you make sure you’re telling people what they
need to know when they need to know it.
   Signage is another important communication conduit that requires
intentional attention. If you notice customers becoming disoriented or
lost within an experiencescape, it’s often because of inadequate signage.
You should also consider the secondary messages your signage might
convey. For example, a sign that reads “Staff Only” is much friendlier than
one that reads “Keep Out,” even though they both serve the same purpose.
You may have seen signs in parking lots warning about the danger of
people breaking into cars. Can you think of a different way to encourage
people not to leave valuables in their car that doesn’t have them starting
off their experience being worried about crime in the area? Everything
speaks, remember? Make sure the messages you communicate to
participants clearly convey the information needed and also help
facilitate the intended outcomes of the experience.


                              Competence

Are front-stage employees competent and well trained for their respective
positions? Do they know the answers to questions participants are likely
to ask? Are they able to complete their part of the experience journey in a
timely and competent manner? Staff incompetence creates real
frustration for participants. You have likely been involved in encounters
where there are multiple service lines and you end up in a line that is held
up because the person serving your line cannot complete some part of the
transaction. So, that person must call on a fellow staff member from
another line. Now two lines are held up. Sometimes this gets even worse,
and numerous lines are held up because one staff member cannot
complete a required task. The obvious solution to this dilemma is to have
sufficient supervisory staff positioned so that they can immediately
intervene and rectify problems that arise.
   Inadequately trained sales associates are frequently frustrating. In
many big-box stores, finding the right person to answer your specific
question can be difficult because of the overwhelming number of products
provided in the store. Most of the employees work at the checkout
counter, and their expertise is in operating the cash register, not
understanding features of merchandise. Having a well-trained staff is a
challenge if you experience a lot of turnover in your workforce. Often
employers do not want to invest resources in training employees they will
soon lose. But poorly trained employees are an obstacle to providing good
experiences for customers. So, a suitable balance needs to be found to
adequately serve the organization and its customers.


                                Courtesy

In many situations, microexperience interactions with front-stage
employees have a significant influence on a participant’s overall
macroexperience. Front-stage employees can create experience peaks and
fill in pits if they are correctly trained. There are several dimensions to
consider when thinking about employee and participant interactions.
First, are employees courteous to customers? Are customers treated as
valuable individuals the organization hopes will return? Do customers
believe their presence matters? For example, are customers greeted when
they enter a store and also given an appropriate parting comment when
they leave? Walgreen pharmacies for a time required each employee to
complete transactions with the comment “Be well!”—a perfect summation
of Walgreen’s reason for existing as a company and its service to
customers. Some theater venues have their ushers thank patrons for
coming as the patrons leave the venue after a performance. Courtesy
never goes out of style, and in many cases it doesn’t take a big investment
of time, just the right dialogue delivered at the right time.
   Are employees appropriately friendly? Notice that we asked whether
they are appropriately friendly; often employees are encouraged or trained
to be inappropriately friendly. In some service encounters, a certain
expected demeanor is lacking. For example, it’s not always appropriate for
young employees to address older customers by their first names, yet this
often happens. In many experiences, customers are not expecting to
create enduring friendships with front-stage employees. The interaction
is a role relationship engaged in for a short time with no expectation for
continuation—for instance, interactions with your waiter at a restaurant
or a ticketing agent at the airport.
   The need for security has made employee courtesy a daunting
challenge for many venues because a customer’s first encounter with the
experience usually involves the security protocol and security personnel.
This is so not only at airports but also at many large stadiums and venues.
Unfortunately, employees involved in security do not generally see
themselves as members of the team providing a pleasant experience for
customers; rather, they view their role as enforcement personnel. With
appropriate training, however, it’s possible for these individuals to
embrace both roles. Mat recently took his family to Disneyland, where he
noticed that the security personnel took it upon themselves to make the
security line a positive experience. Knowing the thoroughness of Disney,
they were likely trained to do so. Their actions ranged from engaging in
friendly banter as they examined bags to encouraging everyone in line to
cheer because they were almost in Disneyland.
   How do you make sure that your front-stage employees are friendly and
courteous? It seems obvious, but thinking about it and developing
dialogues and scripts that send the intended messages are essential. You
can’t simply rely on hiring friendly people; you need to create an
intentional culture of courtesy and train people accordingly. This is
important for all employees as well as volunteers who interact directly
with end users. Keep in mind The Color Run model discussed in chapter 6:
if you know what you want your participants to say at various touchpoints
along their journey, you can empower front-stage staff to think
proactively about what they can do to facilitate the reactions desired.


                               Credibility

Do the actions and activities of front-stage staff instill trust in their
abilities to meet guests’ needs and correctly provide the experience
intended? This is especially important in experiences that have some risk
—outdoor adventure experiences, for example. Often a simple opening
comment about how long someone has been working in a position or how
frequently that staff member has visited a site can instill trust and allay
concerns. To implement this, it’s useful for staff to have a scripted
opening dialogue that welcomes participants, instills confidence in the
staff member’s ability to operate the experience, and gives a preview of
what is to come in the experience. Individuals who have had event-
leadership training will know this, but some of your employees may not
have had this training and will need to be taught.
   Bob was once asked to help organize university commencement
exercises. In previous years, there had been problems at the assembly site
for students who were participating. Students were not paying attention
to directions, and the faculty members were having trouble getting them
in lines. The year before Bob’s involvement, faculty had tried to use
megaphones to give instructions. He suggested that they instead initiate
one-on-one contact with arriving students to greet them, introduce
themselves, congratulate them on graduating, welcome them to
commencement exercises, and tell them what they had to do to
participate. This did not take long and worked well. Students were
welcomed, saw that someone was in charge, and learned that there was a
plan they had a part in to complete the event. Students who had already
received the information felt responsible to pass it on to arriving students.
In this case, providing the knowledge needed to participate in
commencement exercises created credibility.


                                 Recovery

Experiences are delivered and consumed concurrently; in this real-time
production process, some errors invariably occur. When they do occur,
how well do front-stage staff members recover from errors? Staff should
be prepared to recover gracefully from mistakes that are anticipated and
predictable. For example, in operations involving large crowds of families,
it is predictable that there will be lost children. Is there a plan for how to
handle this?
    There is the famous case that occurred in 2017 when United Airlines
forcibly reclaimed a seat from a passenger who was already on board the
aircraft. It is a good example of inadequate anticipation of a predictable
occurrence.8 Didn’t anyone anticipate that someone may resist giving up
their seat once seated on board the aircraft? Evidently not! Even worse,
the organization seemed unprepared to recover from the incident in the
short run, thus dooming the airline to much bad publicity, a large
financial settlement, and devaluation of United’s stock.
    Everyone has likely had a negative incident of some kind in a
restaurant. Lost or incomplete orders and wrong charges, all are
predictable errors that occur while operating a restaurant. Wait staff
should be trained and prepared to recover from these predictable
incidents. Ideally, problems never happen; but, as Murphy’s law predicts,
“anything that can go wrong, will go wrong.” When there are
irregularities, staff must be prepared to recover from them gracefully, and
they should be given as much authority as needed to do so because
successfully salvaging a mistake can win more customer loyalty than if the
mistake had never occurred in the first place.9


                                Reliability

Reliability is assuring that what was promised is indeed delivered. Was the
experience staged effectively to ensure that customer expectations are
met and the designer’s intended outcomes realized? Knowing the source
of expectations helps ensure their delivery. Often experience designers
create expectations in their program fliers or advertising campaign. These
are expectations you know about.
   But there can be expectations created elsewhere that you may not
know about. Word-of-mouth recommendations from previous
participants can create unknown and possibly unreal expectations.
Individuals may have participated in a similar experience operated by
another organization and assume that your operation will be the same. Or
participants may have participated in a similar experience, like a lesson of
golf, for example, and assume that your tennis lessons will be operated
similarly.
   Seth King, the vice president of field marketing for the outdoor gear
brand Cotopaxi, notes that “the customer’s perspective of your brand is
cumulative.”10 He means that even if you’ve changed the experiences you
provide, repeat participants will be coming with expectations drawn from
their previous experiences, and you should be aware of what those are.
The repeat customers may be disappointed that the experience was “not
like it was the last time,” although you think you improved it. Other
companies can also set expectation benchmarks you may not know about
but will be judged on anyway. If you’ve done your empathy homework, as
outlined in chapter 5, you should be ready to deliver high levels of
reliability and meet the expectations of your participants.


                             Responsiveness

Do front-stage employees react to participant requests promptly and
appropriately? Responsiveness is often focused on dealing with situations
in which routine procedure has failed and the customer must seek out an
alternative. Other times it may be focused on situations in which the
customer has a unique issue needing resolution. These scenarios are very
likely to occur, so staff members should anticipate that they will and be
prepared to deal with those that regularly do. We have all had the problem
of trying to attract someone’s attention for help. Staff members who are
staging an experience must be visible and available to participants. A staff
member who is available is the participants’ first need; a staff member
who is trained and able to respond appropriately is their second. Too
often customers must wait for a staff supervisor or someone with higher
authority to respond to anything other than a routine occurrence.
Operational policies must empower front-stage staff to resolve anticipated
recurring problems so that they are dealt with quickly and thoroughly.
   Responsiveness can be difficult in contexts where customers may have
different notions about appropriate responsiveness, as, for example, in
restaurants. To be available and responsive, waiters in some chain
restaurants are trained to check back frequently with guests—so
frequently, they are sometimes there to check on the first bite of food.
Extreme levels of responsiveness can turn into undesirable hovering. Our
own preference is for wait staff to be on call when needed but not to
invade table conversation with a constant stream of questions and
interruptions. Of course, other patrons may prefer the constant
attentiveness. Getting this right can be difficult.
   To improve responsiveness, some hotel chains now have a single
number guests can dial if they have needs and questions. The operator at
this number is usually empowered to obtain an immediate response,
whether for housekeeping, bookkeeping, or maintenance. The hotel
operator used to ask, “Which department would you like?” Now the
operator makes the decision for you by determining which hotel
department is the appropriate one to respond to your question; the
customer no longer has to figure it out by dialing several different
departments until the correct one is located.


                                 Security

People have always had a basic need to feel secure. Today, there is an
obviously heightened need to assure experience participants that they are
secure—physically, socially, and emotionally. Unfortunately, some of the
procedures needed to ensure security are physically invasive or take up
time that could be used for the experience itself. Think creatively about
ways you can keep people safe. Try to make them feel welcome and
assured about safety at the same time. Think back to Mat’s example of the
security line personnel at Disneyland. That you must go through a
security line to get into the “Happiest Place on Earth” seems ironic, but
the cleanliness of the venue, the themed music playing in the background,
and the courtesy of the staff make the security line a positive anticipation
phase experience, as opposed to a frustrating, anxiety-inducing one. This
was achieved through good experience design.
   It’s also important that security procedures result in participants’
feeling secure. Opinion varies about how much security the
Transportation Security Administration (TSA) procedures achieve at
airports. Well-publicized failures of TSA agents passing various tests of
their procedures add to this skepticism. Current procedures are designed
so that TSA personnel spend the same amount of time on each passenger
rather than screening and spending more time on high-risk passengers.
This approach also erodes support for and confidence in the process. The
burden here for the experience designer is to develop security protocols
that seem appropriate for the experience, take as little time as possible,
and create a feeling of security through actual security rather than just
the illusion of it. In today’s world, there is no doubt that security is
needed, and how it is implemented should be a positive part of each
participant’s experience journey, not a memorable negative part of the
experience.


                                Tangibles

Tangibles are the physical elements of the venue and the environment
where an experience is delivered. A first concern is selecting a venue
appropriate for the intended experience. Are the physical layout and
design of the venue appropriate for the experience being delivered? There
are many obvious concerns regarding a facility, including adequate size,
appropriate accessibility, sufficient seating, and so on. Is the venue clean,
neat, and orderly? People prefer clean and neat facilities that are well
designed. Is the venue comfortable in terms of temperature and
humidity? Are sound levels of music or speaking presentations
appropriate?
   These days even manufacturing plants are kept as neat and clean as
possible because this improves employee safety and satisfaction, as well as
productivity. This is an issue that seems obvious but can inadvertently
hinder a good experience. People expect tangibles to be in order, so there
is usually no accolade if they are, but there is great discontent if they are
not. Remember Buc-ee’s bathrooms, a tangible aspect turned into a
memorable touchpoint of the experience!


                             Artistic Factors

Whereas technical factors fall under the category of baseline service
experience expectations, artistic factors (see table 9.2) are a collection of
staging strategies drawn in large part from Pine and Gilmore.11 These lend
added and unexpected value to your experiences and help embellish an
experience. You shouldn’t attempt to use all artistic factors in every
experience you design; rather, choose those that seem to best embellish
specific experiences (i.e., they add to achieving the intended outcomes
and are on theme). In the following sections we’ll introduce each factor,
describe it, and provide examples where each has contributed in a unique
way to an experience. Again, obviously much more could be written about
each.


                             Characterizing

Your experience needs to have a unique characterizing signature. The idea
of characterizing experience-staging roles (e.g., employees at Disneyland
are cast members, Best Buy Geek Squad employees are agents), an idea
introduced by Pine and Gilmore,12 can be applied to experiences
themselves. How is participating in your experience different from
participating in others that may be available? Airlines try very hard to
provide a unique experience signature. Flying Southwest is different from
flying American, for instance. Both companies have well-appointed
airplanes that can take you to the same places. But there are signature
differences, including the way they decorate the planes, the clientele they
try to attract, the food they serve or don’t serve, the onboard
entertainment they provide, and whether they charge for checking
luggage, as well as many other unique signature features that give each
airline a distinct character.

TABLE 9.2
Artistic Factors

Characterizing     Ensuring your experiences have a recognizable, signature style
Customizing        Modifying experiences to meet the unique needs and desires of individual
                     participants
Empathy            Providing attention to participants based on attempts to see the experience
                     from their perspective
Experience         Intentionally designing all phases (anticipation, participation, reflection) of
  Deepening          an experience
Memorializing      Creating touchpoints designed to produce memories for participants
Sensitizing        Considering all five senses when designing experiences
Theming            Using themes to guide the design of an experience


  Companies that offer outdoor adventure trips vary in the number of
chores they expect clients to perform versus the number that staff
members will perform. This, of course, affects price, but it also affects the
nature of a trip. Setting up and taking down camp every day is a lot of
work, but some clients consider the chore an important element of
camping and want to participate. Likewise, rowing a boat is a lot of work
that some clients want to do but others do not. Hiking outfitters
sometimes vary the rigor of each day’s journey and the distance they
expect to cover. With some, hikers need to move along at a brisk pace,
whereas others allow a more leisurely pace. Choices these vendors make
characterize the service they offer and make theirs different from that of
their competitors. Providing this information on the organization’s
website helps distinguish the organization and its products from others.
   Video games are sometimes marketed as being designed by a specific
designer who has developed a reputation for certain gaming features.
These games come with the expectation of a specific style and quality
level associated with the designer. Developing a signature character for
your experiences can help you capture a specific and unique market niche.
Customers should easily be able to articulate the unique nature of the
experiences you provide. If they cannot identify the signature character of
your experiences, you still have more work to do.


                               Customizing

We discussed earlier that individuals will have varying reactions to the
experiences you create. And these alternate interpretations provide for
customizing an event for individuals. But the designer can also
intentionally build in touchpoint templates that allow for individual
interpretation and action; that is, they can build more affordance into an
experience. Bob was once involved in operating a children’s summer craft
program. One of the activities was painting plaster cast figurines. Initially,
the staff provided children with an example of one already painted. Yes,
almost every child tried to duplicate the staff-provided example.
   In response, the program organizers identified two options: provide
more examples (i.e., more choices) or none at all. So, the staff stopped
providing an example and let children come up with their own ideas. This
decision increased the activity’s affordance—without an example, the
children had more interactive possibilities and could experiment with
various options to discover their own unique customization. No examples
= no preordained choices = nondirective, self-discovery options for
participants. Now, left with their choices, some children tried to paint the
figures to reflect reality, others painted them abstractly; some used bright,
fundamental colors usually used in cartoons, and others just created a
mess. But what they did was their choice.
    Creating customization sometimes interferes with efficiency and
requires more work. But people often want things their way. Another
example of customization is staging an organized trip. It’s always a risk for
the trip leader to release participants to do some things on their own: to
give them some freedom to go into shops that interest them, to eat at a
restaurant of their liking, to spend more time viewing one piece of art
over another, and so on. Although keeping participants herded in a single
group led by the trip leader, who is therefore accompanying participants,
is the most efficient and sure way of keeping everyone accounted for, this
arrangement is often the least satisfying for the participants.
    In other experiences, creating customization has become easier and
less costly. Computers are so robust today that anything that is
computerized can be provided with multiple options with little additional
investment. Online shopping experiences are routine and offer countless
options for almost any product. You need go no farther than the keyboard
of your computer to get access to product inventories that can’t possibly
be carried in one location by a retail brick-and-mortar store. The most
engaging shopping programs are written to make the experience one of
discovery, and often the choices offered are sequenced to help consumers
build the product they want. Some of the best programs are educational as
well and provide excellent content.13
   Customizing, which allows individual choice, is generally preferred to
providing no choice at all. Customization is sometimes more expensive
than noncustomized experiences, however, so the experience designer
needs to evaluate the obvious trade-off. B. Joseph Pine II has written
extensively on what he calls “mass customization” and discusses the
difference between offering variety versus providing actual choice. If you
are interested in learning more about this topic, we recommend that you
consult his writings.14 Some caution regarding customizing should also be
given, because as Barry Schwartz notes in his best-selling book The Paradox
of Choice, when it comes to making decisions, more is not always better.15
In fact, our brains struggle to make decisions when presented with too
many options, so use your customization strategies wisely.


                                Empathy

Empathy is important for designing experiences,16 as well as for delivering
experiences.17 Showing empathy and understanding a patron’s dilemma is
a good first response to most problems or situations. This can be done to
excess, however, and in some retail outlets it is. For example, employees in
one nutrition store that Bob frequents always seem to have the same
problem he has, and they can immediately identify a product that solved
the problem for them. Remarkable! Empathy works only when it’s sincere.
   Putting excesses aside, showing sympathy for a customer’s plight is
always a good way to begin rectifying a situation. When there is a problem
with an incorrect charge, for example, a staff member’s simple comment,
“That is irritating, isn’t it? Let’s have a look,” starts the process on the
customer’s side. There was no admission of an error, but the possibility
that one occurred still exists as the conversation moves forward. Training
front-stage staff to respond with this type of general demeanor will
ensure that they show customers empathy and understanding.
   It’s also a good strategy early in a conversation to learn what remedy a
patron has in mind. Finding out the end game from the customer’s
standpoint is very helpful in strategizing the course of the conversation.
Doing this immediately gives employees clues about whether they can
resolve the concern, whether the expected outcome is realistic and
possible, and how to go about concluding the situation. Sometimes
customers’ initial expectations are unrealistic, and the conversational
strategy needs to immediately focus on possible realistic resolutions.
There are also occasions when issues won’t come to a satisfactory
conclusion and it’s best to stop spending time on them as soon as possible.


                        Experience Deepening

Deep experiences are ones where the anticipation, participation, and
reflection phases have been intentionally designed to create harmony
across the entire experience. Collectively, a deep experience includes the
sociopsychological space occupied by the entire experience. Although all
three phases are important, there is a tendency to focus on staging the
participation phase while giving less attention to the anticipation and
reflection phases. To review a bit from previous chapters, recall that
anticipation begins at the first touchpoint of the experience journey map.
This could include an advertisement, a word-of-mouth exchange with a
previous participant, or texted information from a former participant.
These initial contacts are important touchpoints for building expectations
about the experience. Experience designers need to take care at this point
to make sure they are practicing truth in advertising. Meeting
expectations leads to participant satisfaction. Yes, you want to promote
your experience, but you must be able to deliver on the expectations you
create; otherwise, you will have disappointed and dissatisfied participants.
   Designing the participation phase has received adequate treatment
elsewhere in the book, so we won’t spend more time here on this phase.
Actually staging an experience, and thereby implementing the
participation phase, is also time consuming; it is the phase where the most
time is usually spent. But this occurs after design. Reflection is also an
important phase that frequently receives little design attention. Pay close
attention to endings; they are the point of separation from your
experience. Chip Heath and Dan Heath note that endings are more
accurately thought of as transitions from one experience to the next and
are excellent opportunities to build intentional peaks.18 Departing
interactions will be the last contact participants have with the experience
you have designed, and these interactions are likely to influence the
resultant memories they take away. Individuals frequently commiserate or
jointly reflect on the experience with others who shared the experience.
Texting and other social media are heavily used in this process, and you
are well advised to facilitate these exchanges so that you are aware of the
narrative. Often during this process, participants re-create the narrative
of the experience and its meaning to them.
   Recalling an experience is enhanced when there are objects that cue
recall and innumerable artifacts are available as cues. Texted enquiries
from you are but one triggering device to facilitate recall. Photographs
and videos of the experience are well-known and common cues. Formal
acknowledgments, such as certificates, or other acknowledgments specific
to an experience are useful. Tee shirts and other physical objects
associated with the experience may be included in the purchase price to
promote recall. Sometimes recalling an experience involves people, not
just objects—for example, follow-up reunions and the like reunite cohorts
from the experience.
   An experience design will likely pay great attention to the participation
phase, but we remind designers that the anticipation and reflection
phases can be used effectively to enhance an experience and increase the
likelihood of a positive memory.


                             Memorializing

We briefly touched on memorializing in the previous section. Building in
touchpoints intended to help cue lasting memories is always a challenge.
Many experience designers try to create a “wow” to provide participants
with a unique memory. The problem with this approach is that it requires
designers to come up with new and bigger “wows” for repeat participants.
That’s not to say you shouldn’t design for “wow” moments, just make sure
the direction they are taking you is possible and sustainable in subsequent
operations of the experience.
   Photographs and videos of unique moments in experiences create cues
for lasting memories as well as “brag points” to share with friends and
family. Placing them on YouTube and other accessible web-based
platforms provides greater exposure. Given the plethora of souvenirs
available for purchase at most events and experiences, photographs and
videos are becoming some of the few unique and authentic souvenirs that
can be obtained from an experience. Event organizers often expend great
effort to provide participants with a unique photo, preferably one with
just the participant and important physical elements of the experience.
Indeed, on-location photography has become a major revenue stream for
many enterprises. Participants are often allowed to take their own
photographs, but in many cases the best angle or spot for a photo is
reserved for the commercial photographer, who provides the photo for a
fee.
   It’s important that experience designers know the significant
touchpoints in an experience and enhance the memorability of these with
appropriate theater or decorum that is specified in the touchpoint
template. Let’s look again at university commencement exercises. These
are usually attended by the family and loved ones of the students who are
graduating, as well as a contingent of people required to be there,
including faculty and administrators. These ceremonies include much
pomp and circumstance, but the single touchpoint most important to
many attendees is hearing the name of their student read aloud and
seeing their student handed a diploma by a university official. With large
numbers of students, completing this exercise becomes more and more of
a challenge. Yet, commencement is so important that most universities
find some way to accomplish this, either in the main ceremony or in
break-out ceremonies organized by individual colleges or some other unit.
These ceremonies involve great theater, which is partly created with the
colorful regalia faculty members wear. Most other individuals in gown-
wearing professions, like judges and clergy, routinely wear their robes
when performing their duties. But university faculty members wear their
regalia only during commencement exercises, on Founders Day, and on a
few other academic occasions during the year. So, great effort and a
variety of intentional cues are put forth to make commencement exercises
memorable.
   Specific theater characterizes other cultural celebrations and rites of
passage. Christian baptism, for example, consists of pouring water over a
person’s forehead or immersing the person in water and anointing him or
her with oils, along with saying special prayers. This occasion is usually
attended by all close relatives, further signifying the baptism’s
importance. This ceremony and the accompanying artifacts are used
rarely, and thus their use is memorable. Bar mitzvahs and bat mitzvahs are
also once-in-a-lifetime rites of passage and initiation ceremonies for
young boys and girls in the Jewish faith. Quinceañera is the Hispanic
tradition of celebrating a young girl’s coming-of-age on her fifteenth
birthday that includes religious and cultural rites of passage guiding her
from childhood to maturity. Specific cultural or religious
microexperiences make each of these occasions memorable.
   Chip and Dan Heath highlight four techniques that can be used to
memorialize microexperiences or, in other words, transform them from
ordinary touchpoints into extraordinary ones:19

  • Elevation: Use surprise and sensory stimuli to make a touchpoint
    uniquely standout. We’ll talk more about sensitizing in the next
    section as a way to elevate experiences.
  • Insight: Design opportunities for participants to learn something
    new about themselves or the world around them. Such
    touchpoints are designed paradigm shifts or, as we labeled them
    in chapter 3, transformational experiences.
  • Pride: Facilitate experiences where participants are able to
    showcase their best selves. Races, employee recognition events,
    and service opportunities are all examples of pride-infused
    experiences.
  • Connection: Recognize that experiences that help build and
    strengthen social bonds with others can often be the most
    powerful type of experiences. This becomes obvious when you
    reflect on how you cherish memories from experiences where
    relationships were initiated and or strengthened (e.g., first dates,
    family reunions, summer camps).
Chip and Dan’s book is an excellent read, and we highly recommend that
you have a copy in your professional library. It provides many excellent
examples about transforming the ordinary or unexpected into what they
call “defining moments.”


                                Sensitizing

The importance of sensitizing (i.e., designing to delight and surprise the
senses) cannot be overstated. As you design and stage experiences, you
should be continuously evaluating the contribution or distraction of each
sensory perspective: sight, sound, smell, touch, and taste. Is the lighting
appropriate? What does the experience sound like, smell like, feel like, and
taste like? Different senses will be salient depending on the experience,
but don’t overlook any of them, because sensitizing can make or break
your experience. You want the sensory cues to align with and complement
the overall intended experience. We dealt with this topic in chapter 4
while discussing the role of place in the experiencescape, so feel free to
review that section for more insights on sensitizing.


                                 Theming

The importance and power of theming was a major topic in Pine and
Gilmore’s The Experience Economy.20 We usually do a great job developing
theme in familiar events with established theme elements like Christmas,
Hanukkah, birthdays, and the Fourth of July. A theme is a recognizable or
dominant overarching concept that gives harmony to an experience. We
know that hearts, the color red, lace, candy, flowers, and the cupid icon all
call out and reinforce a Valentine theme. However, we often do not fully
establish and develop a theme for other, less well-known or everyday
events. Doing so usually enhances them.
   Theming an experience can be as elaborate as the budget allows the
designer to achieve. Wedding planners know this and have a large
assortment of themed items that can be sold to couples who are being
married. Most of the items are themed by personalizing them with the
couple’s names and wedding date imprinted on them. But today many
couples go beyond these stock items. Theming is so important that many
couples work with their wedding planner to develop a personal theme,
often selecting a theme unique to the couple, something known to their
friends, family, and guests. Some examples: honey from the couple’s
family honey operation, or personalized cozies for beer drinking at a
cowboy-themed wedding. Other examples speak to the couple’s beliefs or
personal projects, such as wildflower seeds from couples committed to
natural habitats.21
   One challenge with theming is investing resources wisely. Theming
should reinforce the intended result of the experience in a tasteful and
supportive manner. But theming can be done to excess and thereby
detract from the experience. Another challenge is to eliminate anything
contrary to the theme of an experience; this can be a problem when an
organizer rents a venue usually used for a different purpose. For example,
universities often use their basketball court or sports arena for
commencement exercises. There are usually many visual indicators that
this is a sports venue, and eliminating or covering them may be necessary
to create an atmosphere suitable for commencement. Bob, who has
attended many commencement exercises, has noticed that when they are
conducted in a sports venue, people tend to yell out when their student is
announced. In contrast, when exercises are held in a theater or
auditorium, there is much less of this loud behavior.
    Lack of theming can detract from experiences. A good example of this
is apparent in many small-town festivals. Although the festivals all have a
titular theme, the attending food vendors and many of the arts, crafts, and
merchandise vendors travel from festival to festival. They bring their
same booth to each of the festivals and sell the same merchandise, thereby
creating a boring sameness to these events. Sameness equals low value
when uniqueness is the key to a memorable experience. In contrast, most
Renaissance festivals are held in more permanent facilities, the food
booths are themed, and there is an attempt to provide some uniqueness
and theming to the food itself. The retail items that are sold are unique
and on theme. In these cases, the food and retail items contribute to
theme and thus make a big difference in the experience. All the staff
members at Renaissance festivals are costumed on theme. Many
spectators who attend these events regularly also wear themed costumes,
in this way adding to the authentic, participatory feel of the experience.
    As companies increasingly recognize the powerful role experiences can
play in connecting customers to brands, the field of experiential
marketing has grown dramatically over the last few years. Many
corporations feature their brand logo and slogan at events they sponsor
and sometimes use both as the basis of a theme. These companies
carefully choose events and other experiences to sponsor, looking for
those that are truly associated with their product or the customers of
their product.
    In some of his research Mat has seen theming both positively and
negatively affect companies’ efforts to provide their employees valued
nonwork experiences at their place of work (e.g., company parties,
workout facilities, game rooms). He conducted interviews with employees
at a software company that held sporting tournaments (e.g., sand
volleyball, frisbee football, softball) every Friday during the summer. He
found that this was great for those employees who liked sports, but the
company employed many software engineers, and there was some
grumbling from the employees who preferred video games over sports. In
contrast to this example, Mat also interviewed employees at an outdoor
gear company that encouraged employees to spend 10 percent of their
work week “in the wild.” Employees really enjoyed this policy because
many of them had chosen to work in this industry because they loved
outdoor recreation. The point is that you should make sure the theme you
choose fits your brand and the preferences of the employees.


                           A Cautionary Tale

As a final contemporary example of why correct sequencing of the
experience design process is so important, consider the case of the Fyre
Festival.22 Starting in 2016, event organizers and a supportive pool of
social-media influencers began promoting Fyre Festival as a two-week
luxury music festival on the island of Great Exuma in the Bahamas. The
festival was billed as the event of the year, and VIP ticket packages priced
at over $100,000 were available. The marketing lead-up to the event
painted an amazing picture of big-name performers, beautiful people in
luxury island accommodations, and five-star dining experiences. This was
the frosting. Unfortunately, the cake was horrible.
   When attendees, many of whom had paid thousands of dollars to
attend, began to arrive on Great Exuma toward the end of April 2017, they
were surprised to encounter what looked more like a refugee camp than a
luxury music festival. Patrons who had been promised luxury glamping
accommodations were offered what looked like disaster-relief tents. The
food provided consisted of bread, cheese, and lettuce in Styrofoam
containers. To top it off, there was not enough water and no electricity for
most attendees. What was supposed to have been a two-week festival was
shut down after the first day, leaving people who had already landed on
Great Exuma stranded and those still trying to get to the island stuck in
mainland airports. Disgruntled attendees who felt they had been tricked
took to social media and unleashed a firestorm of negative backlash
toward the event’s organizers. The event’s founder, Billy McFarland, has
pled guilty to multiple wire fraud charges, and the entire Fyre Festival
debacle has been turned into a Hulu documentary series.23 Not only can
jumping immediately to final enhancements ruin an experience, it can
also significantly damage careers and brands.


                   Summary: The Icing on the Cake

We’ve said from the beginning of this book that experience design is a
complex endeavor. It takes time and intentional concentrated effort to
work through the process of experience design thinking, but it’s worth it.
Your efforts will result in experiences that are much more likely to delight
end users and produce targeted results. The areas for experience
enhancement discussed in this chapter will provide you with some great
ways to embellish your experiences. There are, of course, many more than
we can cover here; but we hope this chapter has helped prime your
creative pump to come up with even more enhancements. Think of them
as additional tools in your toolbox. You won’t use them for every
experience design project, but at least you’ll be aware of the options at
your disposal.
   There are a lot of steps and pieces to consider when designing
experiences, and in this chapter, we’ve added even more things to think
about. Remember, though, not all the factors introduced in this chapter
need to be applied in every experience. Given that we started this chapter
with a baking analogy, let’s use another comparison to wrap things up.
Most baking recipes follow a similar pattern. You mix the wet ingredients
and dry ingredients separately, then you combine them, and finally you
bake whatever it is you’re making. While the process remains the same
across most recipes, what differentiates the end products is the unique
combination of ingredients called for in each recipe. This is how you can
use the same process and end up with brownies one time and peanut-
butter cookies the next.
   Now consider the experience design processes introduced in part 2 of
this book. This is the basic process we recommend that you follow when
designing experiences. What makes each experience unique is not the
process; it’s the ingredients, which in the case of experiences are the
unique combination of experiencescape elements and the technical and
artistic factors discussed in this chapter. Just as master chefs will not try
to use every ingredient at their disposal when making a dish, so too will
master experience designers selectively choose the appropriate
combination of elements and factors to create the perfect experience.
   You’ve almost made it to the end of our book—one more chapter to go.
We’ve made the point from the beginning of the book that all
organizations are in the business of staging experiences whether they
recognize it or not. This means the experience design process should be
used by all organizations. We also believe the experience design process
can be used to think innovatively about other areas of business, including
product development and corporate strategy. We’ll address both areas in
the next chapter.
                                     CHAPTER TEN




        Using Experience Design in Product
       Development and Corporate Strategy


THE TECHNIQUES WE have taught you throughout previous chapters work in any
experience design situation. In this chapter we’ll look specifically at product
development and corporate strategy. We believe that product development that is
focused on the use of a product in an experience is one of the more difficult design
problems. In this chapter we’re going to demonstrate how the experience design process
described in this book can be used to embed products in experience journeys to enhance
the product development process. For our example we’re going to design an experience
around a digital golfers’ tool called Golf Buddy©.
   Golf Buddy is a chip-based electronic device that uses a GPS to determine the distance
a golf ball lies from the hole in the targeted green. This helps golfers select the correct
club for a shot, as each club will hit the ball a different distance. Each golfer hits each
club a little differently, but most golfers know how far they can hit a ball with each
specific club. Often the unknown variable is the distance the ball must be hit in a given
situation. Without some type of assistive device, the golfer must estimate the distance.
Most courses have colored-marker poles at the 100- and 150-foot distances from the
green. But rarely is your ball next to one of these poles.
   So, distance remains a mystery. Some golfers can remember distances once they have
played a course; most cannot. Professional golfers and their caddies scout courses in
advance of competitive play, and the caddies take extensive notes about distances,
obstacles, slope, and other factors relevant to each hole on a specific course. But most
everyday golfers could use help with some of these contingencies, especially distance.
   Golf Buddy is a simple and reasonably priced product that enhances the everyday
golfer’s experience of playing golf. The device is available in different configurations,
including a fob that can be clipped to a belt loop or your golf bag as well as a wristwatch
type of setup for wearing the device on an arm. When in use, the device shows the
distance remaining to a specific hole and also offers an alternate program that enables
players to determine the distance of the shot they just completed. This latter feature
helps golfers make a more accurate club selection by helping them learn how far they
can hit with each club. Distances reported are accurate, and the device is easy to use.
Golfers can use it unobtrusively while playing the game. It works at almost every golf
course in the United States, and golfers can access and download international courses
from the Golf Buddy website.
   The main skills in golf are, of course, hitting a shot the correct distance and in the
right direction. Golf Buddy does not substitute or change either of these skills—golfers
must still acquire and exhibit these skills. The program does remove the uncertainty
about the length of the next shot. Thus, Golf Buddy provides important information that
enhances the golfing experience, and a player’s interactive experience with the device is
usually positive.


                         The Golf Buddy Experience Journey

The Golf Buddy accompanies a golfer during a round of golf. This is a known, intentional,
and routine experience journey. Each of the eighteen episodes of a round of golf follows
the same scenario. The golfer must tee off, take a varying number of shots from the
fairway toward the green, perhaps execute a chip or approach shot, and finally putt. The
intention is, of course, to take as few shots as possible to put the ball in the cup on each
tee. But the game is not monotonous; every one of the eighteen holes of a golf course and
each golf course itself is designed differently. To be a true buddy, Golf Buddy will need to
help the golfer take fewer shots. So, the intention of Golf Buddy is to help golfers reduce
the number of strokes they take during a round and thus improve their score. To be
marketable, the program will need to be in a price point with other golf accessories.
What follows are the details of the experience journey, its touchpoints and transitions.


            Touchpoints and Transitions of the Golf Buddy Experience
The specifics of each touchpoint in an experience journey is planned and represented in
the graphs shown in figures 10.1 through 10.6. Following are our thoughts about how
these designs would be planned, graphed, and accomplished.


   Touchpoint Template #1—The Macroexperience of Playing Golf with Golf
                                Buddy

You will notice in this touchpoint that the desired reaction from using the product is
that “Golf Buddy was easy to use and improved my game.” The experiencescape elements
in this experience include the golfer (participant), a golf course, Golf Buddy, golf balls,
golf clubs, and playing partners. The two critical designed interactions are the golfer’s
ability to easily operate Golf Buddy and the device’s provision of accurate, reliable
information. Backstage contributors include computer programmers who will make Golf
Buddy’s use unobtrusive but accurate and a manufacturer who can make a reliable,
attractive product. The co-creation intended is that the golfer who is interacting with
Golf Buddy will play a better round of golf. The primary desired technical enhancement
is reliable operation. The two primary artistic factors include good product design and
good graphic display. So, a product that is reliable, accurate, and easy to use while golfing
is the sum of the experience desired.


                Touchpoint Template #2—Meeting Your Golf Buddy

This touchpoint is intended to be a mindful experience because it mostly involves
learning with an additional intention to excite the golfer about playing golf with the Golf
Buddy. The desired reactions from touchpoint template 2 are that “this was easy to use”
and that the player felt “anticipation to use Golf Buddy.” The experiencescape elements
are the golfer, the Golf Buddy, and the written instructions accompanying the device.
Three interactions need to occur to accomplish the desired reactions: reading the
instructions, interacting with the Golf Buddy via the instructions, and charging the Golf
Buddy. This touchpoint is, certainly, high on co-creation because the golfer must do the
reading to learn how to use the Golf Buddy. A critical enhancement is clear
communication. The instructional flyer that comes with the product is simple to read, is
only one-page long, and has great graphics. The immediate subliminal message from the
flyer is that this is going to be short and easy, and indeed it is.
Figure 10.1 Touchpoint template 1.
Figure 10.2 Touchpoint template 2.



                             Touchpoint Template #3—Initiating Play

Upon arriving at the course, the golfer must turn on Golf Buddy. This is accomplished by
simply turning on a switch, and the Golf Buddy subsequently announces its progress as it
locates satellites and finds the golf course being played. Once this is done, the golfer is
directed to move to the first tee. The distance from the golfer’s location to the cup is
displayed on Golf Buddy at the start of the game. The golfer then proceeds as usual and
takes the first shot unless he or she decides to implement touchpoint template 3a,
having Golf Buddy track the distance of the shot. Golf Buddy informs play but does not
disrupt or change it. The player then proceeds to the ball and implements touchpoint
template 3a or touchpoint template 4.


       Touchpoint Template #3a—Educational Alternate Experience Journey
Touchpoint template 3a is an alternative touchpoint that occurs if a golfer wants to know
how far he or she has hit a shot. By pushing a button before hitting the ball, the player
can set up Golf Buddy to report the distance of the shot. Some players like to know the
distance of their tee shot and will use this feature once each hole. Others like to know
how far they can hit various clubs and will use this feature as their interest dictates.
Usually, once a player learns how far he or she hits various clubs, the use for this purpose
will wane.




Figure 10.3 Touchpoint template 3.
Figure 10.4 Touchpoint template 3a.
Figure 10.5 Touchpoint template 4.
Figure 10.6 Touchpoint template 5.




                            Touchpoint Template #4—Continuing Play

Once the player arrives at the destination of the shot taken, Golf Buddy immediately
displays the distance remaining to the hole. This information is updated automatically
with the GPS, and the player need do nothing except read the information from the
display screen. Also, because hole locations on greens are moved frequently, Golf Buddy
displays three locations—front, middle, and back—to increase accuracy. The result
intended from the information Golf Buddy provides is an improved golf game, which
should result in more memorable and meaningful experiences. A further benefit is that
the player’s real-life golf buddies appreciate being allowed to use Golf Buddy to calculate
their own shot distances.
   The continuing transitions, then, are iterating between touchpoint template 3, 3a, and
4 through the entire eighteen holes of golf. If a player does not use the touchpoint
template 3a feature, everything is automatic and all the player must do is read the
information from the display screen to make certain he or she is using the information
about the current location of the hole. This is quickly and easily done when selecting a
club from a golf bag. Using the Golf Buddy is seamless and does not interfere with the
usual flow of a golf game. Banter between friends, strategizing a shot, setting up for a
shot, taking the shot, and so on all proceed as usual.
   The continual iteration of touchpoint templates 3, 3a, and 4 through each hole may
seem repetitive. But remember, each hole is different. Each has a different distance and
par, and each uses various hazards, including water, moguls, and bunkers. Although the
Golf Buddy operates the same way each time, each succeeding hole is a different
experience because of the unique design of each hole.


                        Touchpoint Template #5—End of Play

When finished with a round, the golfer must switch off Golf Buddy. If the golfer forgets,
the device will turn itself off after a period of inactivity. The reactions intended at this
point are reflection about the usefulness of Golf Buddy while playing a round and
anticipation of using it in future rounds. The manufacturer, of course, hopes that the
reflection is positive, that the golfer sees Golf Buddy as a positive contributor to the
game. At this point the golfer transitions back to touchpoint template 2 to recharge the
unit.


                       Summary—The Golf Buddy Experience

Using Golf Buddy is easy and unobtrusive. Whether it improves a player’s game is not
certain, but it is possible. So, one of Golf Buddy’s two intended reactions is assured—it is
a product likely to receive a favorable review. Part of its effectiveness is how well it fits
into experiencing flow in a game of golf. This objective is to some degree achieved
because of the targeted affordance the Golf Buddy was designed to provide.
   The GPS and computer-chip technology are robust, and many more features could
have been included. For example, stats on how well a player previously played a certain
hole and the player’s lifetime average for a specific hole could have been built in. A
player’s average distance per club could have been added as well—all potentially neat
features. But the designers chose not to add these extras because they understood how
their product was going to be used in the golf experience. Golfers need a buddy, someone
or something that cares enough about them and their golf game to make it better, not
something that will demand so much attention that it detracts from playing golf and
interacting with their real-life golf buddies. So, there is a sweet spot for affordance that
must be realized depending on the role a product will play in the experience drama. The
product may not be the lead actor, just a supporting one. Do not get this wrong. More
features do not always equate to a better product. Understanding the experience in
which a product will be used informs these decisions in a way no other perspective can.


                     Experience Design and Corporate Strategy

Corporations are taking notice of experiences. The notion of experience is increasingly
found in their missions, values statements, and strategic plans. More and more
organizations are appointing chief experience officers to ensure oversight and
coordination of the organization’s experience design and delivery efforts.1 In this section
we’ll share examples of corporations that have made the delivery of excellent
experiences a central pillar of their strategic planning. The following examples represent
only a small sample of corporate strategies related to experience, but we hope they
provide you with some valuable insights into the ways corporations are focusing on
experiences.


                                       Restaurants

Fox Restaurant Concepts is a Phoenix-based company with a growing line of nearly fifty
unique restaurant concepts across sixteen states. On its website Fox shares the following
organizational belief: “We believe the best stories are shared over food…. We create
spaces that evoke emotion, because we believe food is all about the experience and being
able to connect with those who matter.”2 How does the company deliver a great dining
experience? The website further states:

   We challenge ourselves to find ways to make our best ideas even better. Every day.
   We understand that the only way to guarantee our guests the best experience is to
   constantly refine and perfect it. So when we create new concepts in our test
   kitchen, we immerse ourselves in all the little details—from the uniforms to the
   menus, from the food to the music, from the lighting to the linens, all the way
  down to the salt and pepper shakers—and rework things until they all fit together
  perfectly.3

We hope reading this statement made you think about artistic factors and elements of
the experiencescape. Notice how the company works to make the various elements of a
new experience speak together in harmony.4 Fox has applied sound experience design
principles to create its restaurant experience. You now have the tools you need to
accomplish focused, intentional design in a variety of endeavors. The process you’ve
learned in this book is easily generalizable.
   Brinker International, a casual dining restaurant company with more than sixteen
hundred restaurants in a variety of countries, welcomes more than one million guests a
day into the company’s Chili’s and Maggiano’s restaurants. In its “Making People Feel
Special” commitment on the company website, Brinker International states, “We’re
driven by integrity, teamwork and passion—plus an unwavering commitment for every
Guest to have an exceptional dining experience when visiting our brands.”5 How does the
company ensure this? Chief Executive Officer and President Wyman T. Roberts, in
Brinker’s 2016 Annual Report, shared his executive-level thinking about the dining
experiences his company hopes to provide: “We are leveraging the heritage of the Chili’s
brand and increasing media weight to tell the story of investments in culinary
innovation and a dining experience like no place else.”6
   Experience innovations currently being implemented in Brinker International’s
Maggiano’s Little Italy brand include responding to two specific dining experience needs
desired by the clientele: carryout and delivery. In some cases, Brinker has built new
restaurants with a smaller footprint because there is no need to provide a dining area for
carryout and delivery orders. The company is also identifying specific experiences to co-
create with customers, including offering cooking classes, wine education classes, and
murder mystery events. It wants Maggiano’s to be the location of choice for families and
friends who are celebrating a memorable event; at the same time, it wants to provide
companies with unique engagement opportunities for their employees.7 Each of these
business strategies is focused on specific customer experiences that have been identified
as actionable and marketable.


                             Retail and Consumer Goods
In January 2018 Amazon opened its first Amazon Go grocery store in Seattle, and now
Amazon has plans to open two additional stores in San Francisco and Seattle.8 These
stores are Amazon’s attempt to completely redesign the grocery story experience by
removing the checkout line. Thanks to cameras and shelf sensors, all items placed into
shopper’s bags are tracked and recorded. When individuals are done shopping, all they
have to do is walk out and they are automatically charged for the items in their bags.
Amazon’s broader strategy to disrupt the grocery industry involves the online sale of
groceries and the company’s acquisition of Whole Foods, but all this points to a strategic
effort to redesign the experience of buying groceries.
   Hasbro, the largest toy manufacturer in the world, shares the following corporate goal
on its website: “Hasbro is a global play and entertainment company committed to
Creating the World’s Best Play Experiences.”9 The toy company owns some of the most iconic
game brands that you have likely played and enjoyed with friends and family. These
include Monopoly©, Scrabble©, and Chutes and Ladders©. These games remain popular
because they have great affordance; that is, they provide opportunities for a variety of
different experience for players within the context created by the rules of the various
games. Hasbro has recently moved to patent the smell of playdough.10 This also shows
that Hasbro understands the important role sensory elements play in experiences, a
topic discussed in chapters 4 and 9.


                               Hospitality and Tourism

You should have known we couldn’t help adding a Disney example to this section. In 2017
Disney announced plans for a Star Wars–themed hotel to open at Walt Disney World. In
2018 Disney provided more details about this project, describing the hotel as

  a first-of-its-kind resort will combine luxury with complete immersion into an
  authentic Star Wars story…. At the resort, guests immediately become active
  citizens of the galaxy and can dress up in the proper attire…. The opportunity for
  immersion at this resort will also stand out among all Disney resorts around the
  globe, as it will be seamlessly connected to Star Wars: Galaxy’s Edge at Disney’s
  Hollywood Studios, allowing guests a total Star Wars experience.11
We’re excited to see how this new experience is received by the public. Remember how
we emphasized the importance of storytelling in experience design in chapter 8? The
Star Wars hotel is a bold example of leveraging the power of a well-known story to design
immersive, co-created experiences.
   Holland America Line doubles down on experiences in its mission statement:
“Through excellence, we create once-in-a-lifetime experiences, every time.”12 Cruises are
an expensive and relatively long engagement. For many people cruising is a one-off
experience. Although Holland America Line cruises offer many different itineraries, they
include a number of themed programs and services that provide uniformity for each
sailing. Examples include an evening at Le Cirque and a Culinary Arts Center on each
ship, along with other programs that make each Holland America Line sailing similar.
Through these consistent programs, a corporate brand is developed and maintained.


                                    Home Building

Lennar, one of the nation’s premier “home builders,” has been building homes since
1954. The company builds in nineteen states in forty markets. A home is the single most
expensive item most people ever buy. Building and purchasing a home is a fairly
complicated task that involves designers, builders, financers, title closers, insurance
agents, and so on. At its “my Lennar” website, the company provides an online resource
“to begin a simplified home purchase and ownership experience.”13 Lennar then
provides access to interactive technology of web-based suppliers and vendors of all that
is needed to select, build, and purchase a home.


                                      Technology

After completing his MBA, in 2012, Ben Rabner started working full time for Adobe as a
web and content strategist for Adobe Experience Cloud. As he observed the effectiveness,
or lack thereof, of traditional lead-generation techniques like cocktail parties and steak
dinners for executives, he began to sense an opportunity to redesign how Adobe went
about building relationships with potential clients. Given his background in competitive
road cycling and a rising interest among corporate executives in the sport, Rabner
lighted on the idea of staging curated road rides for executives at large international
technology conferences.
   Ben Rabner saw these curated road rides as an opportunity for Adobe to provide
corporate executives a chance to do something they love while traveling and still
accomplishing business objectives. This empathetic insight started him on a path from
creating a few rides a year as a side project while managing the content team, to his 2015
appointment to his current position as head of experiential marketing for Adobe. The
success of his efforts was largely driven by measuring their effect on business and the
incredible response from executives about the cycling events and how they helped
Adobe build relationships that ultimately influenced revenue and relationships. Adobe
continues to expand experiences to include hiking, culinary arts, and photography for
executives. The trend of using cycling and other recreational experiences to build
corporate relationships is being rapidly adopted across a variety of industries globally.14


        Summary—The Experience Economy Requires Experience Design

We have taken a long journey into experience design. We have demonstrated in this
chapter how experience design concepts and techniques may be used to develop a
product by contextualizing it in the experience it will facilitate. Envisioning a product’s
use in an experience and then actually developing the product with this experiential use
in mind is one of the more complicated experience design problems. Using the realities
and interactions of an actual experience as one of the design criteria seems intimidating.
In reality, constant focus on use as the sideboards of a design problem often enables
insightful solutions that would otherwise be inaccessible. We hope this demonstration
helps you become a better experience designer.
   Corporations from all industries are paying more attention to experiences. Chief
experience officers are being hired to ensure that good experiences are delivered
consistently across their organizations. Experience and experience outcomes are
appearing as strategic initiatives as well as specific outcomes in corporate plans. Yes,
experience matters to participants, and many companies are focusing their strategic
efforts on providing not just products and services but also outstanding experiences. It is
clear that companies that deliver great experiences thrive and those that don’t die.
                         Conclusion

                           Closing Thoughts



THANKS FOR GOING on this journey with us. We wrote this book to
introduce you to approaches and tools that will allow you to practice
experience design more effectively and systematically. We hope that we’ve
accomplished this goal. Reading about and engaging in experience design
are two different things. You may already be actively involved in
experience design, or this book may be your first exposure to the topic.
Either way, we encourage you to use the tools we have discussed as you
design experiences.
   We’re both educators, so we can’t help but give you a homework
assignment as you finish this book. Consider it your personal experience
design professional-development project—a type of self-certification in
experience design. Here’s what we’d like you to do:

   1. Pick an experience, be it personal or professional, that you would
      like to design or redesign.
   2. Identify some actual or potential end users (you could even be
      the end user, depending on what type of experience you’re
      designing) and talk to them, observe them, and develop some
      empathy for them. Try to understand the experience you’re
      designing or redesigning from their perspective and create their
      persona(s).
   3. Based on what you find out, follow the steps outlined in chapter
      5 to develop a point-of-view statement, and then start ideating.
   4. Create an experience map prototype based on the results of your
      ideation, using the guidelines in chapter 6. Consider shaping
      your experience map with an underlying narrative or heroic
      journey, as we discussed in chapter 8.
   5. After you complete the experience map, make sure to test it out
      on an end user. Have the person vicariously experience (i.e.,
      visualize) your prototype and provide feedback. Revise your
      experience map based on the feedback received. Continue
      revising and testing as necessary.
   6. Once you’ve got the experience map sufficiently polished, use
      the touchpoint template introduced in chapter 7 to build each
      touchpoint of your mapped experience.
   7. The result of these efforts will be an experience map and a
      compilation of touchpoint templates that will serve as the
      blueprints for staging the experience.

Once you’ve completed this process, do it again for another experience.
Over time, the process will become less of a step-by-step approach and
more of an ingrained philosophy and operational protocol for designing
experiences. Although we recommend that when you first start designing
experiences, you follow these outlined steps exactly as shown, keep in
mind that as your expertise develops over time, you will tweak and
integrate these approaches and tools to best fit your own style and the
experience design opportunities you encounter.
   The process of designing and then staging experiences can be
extremely fulfilling. Seeing an experience progress from a mental concept
to a tangible encounter for your end user is rewarding. Experience design
also takes courage, because when you hand over the experience you’ve
designed to end users, you may have created something that never existed
before and you’re never quite sure how they will respond. Will they like it?
Will they want to try it again? Such thoughts must have been going
through Walt Disney’s mind on the opening day of Disneyland. When the
experience design works, it’s exhilarating. Sharon Baird, one of the
original Mouseketeers, fondly remembers the emotional significance that
moment held for Walt:

  On the opening day of Disneyland, we [Mouseketeers] were in Walt
  Disney’s private apartment above the Main Street Fire Station when
  the gates of the park opened for the first time. I was standing next
  to him at the window, watching the guests come pouring through
  the gates. When I looked up at him, he had his hands behind his
  back, a grin from ear to ear, I could see a lump in his throat and a
  tear streaming down his cheek. He had realized his dream.1

   Although you most likely won’t design and build the world’s most
iconic theme park, you will feel a similar sense of fulfillment from
delivering well-designed experiences to people who value them enough to
remember them and their impact. This, more than any other reason, is
why we wrote this book. We want you to succeed in designing
experiences. The information and tools included in this book will give you
confidence to design experiences. Finally, we want you to feel the sense of
fulfillment that comes from seeing others be positively affected by the
experiences you’ve designed for them. Good luck!

                                                   J. Robert Rossman (Bob),
                                                                 Phoenix, AZ
Mathew D. Duerden (Mat),
               Provo, UT
                                           Notes


              1. Exploring Experiences and Experience Design

   1. NICE Satmetrix, “U.S. Consumer 2018 Net Promoter Benchmarks at a Glance,” NICE Satmetrix,
2018,       http://info.nice.com/rs/338-EJP-431/images/NICE-Satmetrix-infographic-2018-b2c-nps-
benchmarks-050418.pdf.
   2. Frederick Reichheld, “The One Number You Need to Grow,” Harvard Business Review (December
2003), https://hbr.org/2003/12/the-one-number-you-need-to-grow.
   3. The NPS scale is 1–10. However, in computing a final score, these raw scores are converted to
percentages, resulting in a double-digit final score. NPS is widely used throughout numerous
organizations to obtain a read on customer and employee brand loyalty. Nevertheless, the reader is
cautioned that NPS is an attention-directing device, not a diagnostic one. A low score for your
industry informs you that something is not going right. Additional analysis is necessary to figure
out what is malfunctioning. For more information on using NPS, we recommend Frederick
Reichheld and Rob Markey, The Ultimate Question 2.0 (Boston: Harvard Business Review Press, 2011).
   4. B. Joseph Pine II and James H. Gilmore, The Experience Economy: Work Is Theatre and Every
Business a Stage (Boston: Harvard Business School Press, 1999).
   5. B. Joseph Pine II and James H. Gilmore, The Experience Economy, updated ed. (Boston: Harvard
Business Review Press, 2011).
   6. Clay Shirky, Cognitive Surplus: Creativity and Generosity in a Connected Age (New York: Penguin,
2010), 21.
   7. Gary Ellis, Keynote Address, Experience Industry Management Conference, Brigham Young
University, Provo, UT, March 21–22, 2013.
   8. Paul Ratner, “Want Happiness? Buy Experiences, Not Things, Says a Cornell Psychologist,” Big
Think, July 22, 2016, http://bigthink.com/paul-ratner/want-happiness-buy-experiences-not-more-
stuff; Elizabeth Dunn and Michael Norton, Happy Money: The Science of Happier Spending (New York:
Simon & Schuster, 2014).
   9. Erik Qualman, Socialnomics: How Social Media Transforms the Way We Live and Do Business, 2nd ed.
(Hoboken, NJ: Wiley, 2012); David Meerman Scott, The New Rules of Marketing and PR (Hoboken, NJ:
Wiley, 2017), 65.
   10. Patricia Laya, “Nightmare: 7 Customer Service Blunders That Went Viral,” Business Insider,
June 17, 2011, http://www.businessinsider.com/7-very-public-lessons-in-customer-service-2011-6.
   11. Josh Bersin, Jason Flynn, Art Mazor, and Veronica Melian, “Rewriting the Rules for the Digital
Age,” Deloitte Insights, 2017 Global Human Capital Trends, February 28, 2017, 7,
https://www2.deloitte.com/insights/us/en/focus/human-capital-trends/2017/improving-the-
employee-experience-culture-engagement.html.
   12. Mat D. Duerden, Peter J. Ward, and Patti A. Freeman, “Conceptualizing Structured
Experiences: Seeking Interdisciplinary Integration,” Journal of Leisure Research 47, no. 5 (2015): 601.
   13. Majstro, s.v. “experiri,” http://www.majstro.com/dictionaries/Latin-English/experiri.
   14. Duerden, Ward, and Freeman, “Conceptualizing Structured Experiences,” 601.
   15. Brian Solis, X: The Experience When Business Meets Design (Hoboken, NJ: Wiley, 2015), 132.
   16. Robert K. Merton, “Resistance to the Systematic Study of Multiple Discoveries in Science,”
European Journal of Sociology 4, no. 2 (1963): 237.
   17. B. Joseph Pine II and James Gilmore, “The Roles of the Chief Experience Officer,” AMA
Quarterly (Winter 2017–2018): 5–10.
   18. Peter Benz, Experience Design: Concepts and Case Studies (London: Bloomsbury, 2014), ix.
   19. Harold G. Nelson and Erik Stolterman, The Design Way: Intentional Change in an Unpredictable
World, 2nd ed. (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2012), 12.



                         2. What Makes a Great Experience?

   1. Adam Alter, Irresistible: The Rise of Addictive Technology and the Business of Keeping Us Hooked (New
York: Penguin, 2018).
   2. Michael J. Ellis, Why People Play (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1973).
   3. Stuart L. Brown, Play: How It Shapes the Brain, Opens the Imagination, and Invigorates the Soul (New
York: Avery, 2009).
   4. Barry Schwartz, The Paradox of Choice: Why More Is Less (New York: HarperCollins, 2004).
   5. Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi, Flow: The Psychology of Optimal Experience (New York: HarperCollins,
2008).
   6. Csikszentmihalyi’s work on flow and related concepts directly relates to how experience is
operationalized. The material cited here was deduced from his work but is not a direct quotation.
   7. The Y (YMCA), “Our Focus,” The Y, https://www.ymca.net/our-focus.
   8. Martin E. P. Seligman, Authentic Happiness: Using the New Positive Psychology to Realize Your
Potential for Lasting Fulfillment (New York: Simon & Schuster, 2004).
   9. Paul Dolan, Happiness by Design (New York: Penguin Random House, 2014), 10.
   10. Seligman, Authentic Happiness, 42
   11. Dolan, Happiness by Design, 35.
   12. Chip Heath and Dan Heath, The Power of Moments: Why Certain Experiences Have Extraordinary
Impact (New York: Simon & Schuster, 2017).
   13. Martin E. P. Seligman, Flourish: A Visionary New Understanding of Happiness and Well-Being (New
York: Simon & Schuster, 2012), 16–20.
   14. Seligman, Flourish, 16.
   15. Seligman, Flourish, 17.
   16. Seligman, Flourish, 17.
   17. Amy Wrzesniewski, Clark McCauley, Paul Rozin, and Barry Schwartz, “Jobs, Careers, and
Callings: People’s Relations to Their Work,” Journal of Research in Personality 31, no. 1 (1997): 21–33.
   18. Richard M. Ryan and Edward L. Deci, “Self-Determination Theory and the Facilitation of
Intrinsic Motivation, Social Development, and Well-Being,” American Psychologist 55, no. 1 (2000): 68.
   19. Edward L. Deci and Richard M. Ryan, eds., Handbook of Self-Determination Research. (Rochester,
NY: Univ. Rochester Press, 2002).
   20. Daniel Kahneman, Thinking, Fast and Slow (London: Macmillan, 2011), 20–21.
   21. Heath and Heath, The Power of Moments, 11.
   22. Richard C. Atkinson and Richard M. Shiffrin, “Human Memory: A Proposed System and Its
Control Processes,” in The Psychology of Learning and Motivation, vol. 2, ed. Kenneth W. Spence and
Janet Taylor Spence (New York: Academic Press, 1968), 89.
   23. Jennifer Ouellette, “As Time Goes By—Scientists Found Brain’s Internal Clock That Influences
How        We       Perceive       Time,”      ARS     Technica,        August       31,      2018,      2,
https://arstechnica.com/science/2018/08/scientists-found-brains-internal-clock-that-influences-
how-we-perceive-time.
   24. Rita Elmkvist Nilsen, “How Your Brain Experiences Time,” Gemini Research News, August 29,
2018, 1, https://geminiresearchnews.com/2018/08/how-your-brain-experiences-time.
   25. Albert Tsao, Jørgen Sugar, Li Lu, Cheng Wang, James J. Knierim, May-Britt Moser, and Edvard
I. Moser, “Integrating Time from Experience in the Lateral Entorhinal Cortex,” Nature (San
Francisco, CA: Springer Nature, 2018), n.p.
   26. Nilsen, “How Your Brain Experiences Time,” 2.
   27. Nilsen, “How Your Brain Experiences Time,” 2.
   28. Nilsen, “How Your Brain Experiences Time,” 4.
   29. B. Joseph Pine II and James H. Gilmore, The Experience Economy: Work Is Theatre and Every
Business a Stage (Boston: Harvard Business School Press, 1999).
   30. B. Joseph Pine II and James H. Gilmore, The Experience Economy, updated ed. (Boston: Harvard
Business Review Press, 2011).
   31. Brian Solis, X: The Experience When Business Meets Design (Hoboken, NJ: Wiley, 2015), 10.
   32. Pine and Gilmore, The Experience Economy, 2.
   33. Barry Schwartz, The Paradox of Choice: Why More Is Less (New York: HarperCollins, 2004).
   34. Pine and Gilmore, The Experience Economy, 108–17.
   35. Pine and Gilmore, The Experience Economy, 101–18.
   36. Pine and Gilmore, The Experience Economy, 29.
   37. Pine and Gilmore, The Experience Economy, 30.
   38. Josh Bersin, Jason Flynn, Art Mazor, and Veronica Melian, “Rewriting the Rules for the Digital
Age,” Deloitte Insights, 2017 Global Human Capital Trends, February 28, 2017, 57,
https://www2.deloitte.com/insights/us/en/focus/human-capital-trends/2017/improving-the-
employee-experience-culture-engagement.html.
   39.                 Business                 Dictionary,               s.v.               “production,”
http://www.businessdictionary.com/definition/production.html.
   40. John R. Kelly, Leisure Business Strategies: What They Don’t Teach You in Business School (Urbana, IL:
Sagamore, 2013), 109.




                        3. A Framework of Experience Types

   1. Bernardo Kastrup, Henry P. Stapp, and Menas C. Kafatos, “Coming to Grips with the
Implications of Quantum Mechanics,” Scientific American, May 29, 2018, 3,
https://blogs.scientificamerican.com/observations/coming-to-grips-with-the-implications-of-
quantum-mechanics.
   2. Kastrup, Stapp, and Kafatos, “Implications of Quantum Mechanics,” 5.
   3. John Dewey, Art as Experience (New York: Penguin, 2005).
   4. Merriam-Webster, s.v. “prosaic,” https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/prosaic?
utm_campaign=sd&utm_medium=serp&utm_source=jsonld.
   5. Daniel Kahneman, Thinking, Fast and Slow (London: Macmillan, 2011).
   6. Kahneman, Thinking, Fast and Slow.
   7. Kahneman, Thinking, Fast and Slow.
   8. Dewey, Art as Experience.
   9. Kahneman, Thinking, Fast and Slow.
   10. Personal communication with Bob, who hosted Bill Nye the Science Guy when Bill keynoted
Science and Technology Week (Illinois State University, Normal, IL, April 17, 2001).
   11. For links to some of the best flight safety videos, check out
http://mentalfloss.com/article/67178/11-creative-flight-safety-videos-around-world.
   12. Daniel Kahneman and Jason Riis, “Living, and Thinking About It: Two Perspectives on Life,”
in The Science of Well-Being, ed. Felicia A. Huppert, Nick Baylis, and Barry Keverne (Oxford: Oxford
Univ. Press, 2005), 285–304.
   13. For a good treatment of this topic, check out Daniel Kahneman, Thinking, Fast and Slow; and
Chip Heath and Dan Heath, The Power of Moments (New York: Simon & Schuster, 2017).
   14. Heath and Heath, The Power of Moments, 11.
   15. Martin Miller, “Disney’s Lost and Found: Tales of Missing Children Have Happy Endings at
Park,” Los Angeles Times, June 12, 1994, http://articles.latimes.com/1994-06-12/news/mn-
3422_1_lost-children.
   16. Mary Jo Bitner, Bernard H. Booms, and Mary Stanfield Tetreault, “The Service Encounter:
Diagnosing Favorable and Unfavorable Incidents,” Journal of Marketing 54 (1990): 71–84.
   17. Martin E. P. Seligman, Authentic Happiness: Using the New Positive Psychology to Realize Your
Potential for Lasting Fulfillment (New York: Simon & Schuster, 2004), 8.
   18. Charles Dickens, A Christmas Carol (London: Bradberry & Evans, 1858), 91.
   19. Dickens, A Christmas Carol, 91.
   20. Dickens, A Christmas Carol, 99.
   21. Jenkins L. Jones, “Big Rock Candy Mountains,” Deseret News (Salt Lake City, UT), June 12, 1973,
A4.
   22. Michael W. Eysenck, Happiness: Facts and Myths (Hove, East Sussex, UK: Psychology Press,
1994).
   23. P. Brickman, D. Coates, and R. Janoff-Bulman, “Lottery Winners and Accident Victims: Is
Happiness Relative?,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 36, no. 8 (1978): 917.
   24. Steve Diller, Nathan Shedroff, and Darrel Rhea, Making Meaning: How Successful Businesses
Deliver Meaningful Customer Experiences (San Francisco: New Riders, 2008), 3.
   25. Herbert Blumer, Symbolic Interactionism: Perspective and Method (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-
Hall, 1969).
   26. J. Robert Rossman and Barbara E. Schlatter, Recreation Programming: Designing and Staging
Leisure Experiences, 7th ed. (Urbana, IL: Sagamore, 2015), 28–30.
   27. Rossman and Schlatter, Recreation Programming, 29.
   28.     Harlem       Globetrotters,      Magic      Pass,   accessed       September     14,   2018,
https://www.harlemglobetrotters.com/magic-pass.
   29. Richard Florida, The Rise of the Creative Class (New York: Basic Books, 2002), 166–67.
   30. Mat D. Duerden, Peter A. Witt, and Stacey Taniguchi, “The Impact of Postprogram Reflection
on Recreation Program Results,” Journal of Park and Recreation Administration 30, no. 1 (2012): 36–50.
   31. Arlie R. Hochschild, The Managed Heart (Berkeley: Univ. of California Press, 1983), 7.
   32. Hochschild, The Managed Heart, 21.
   33. Tony Schwartz and Catherine McCarthy, “Manage Your Energy, Not Your Time,” Harvard
Business Review 85, no. 10 (2007): 63.
   34. David Meerman Scott, The New Rules of Marketing and PR (New York: Wiley, 2017), 49.
   35. Seligman, Authentic Happiness, 102.
   36. Seligman, Authentic Happiness, 103.
   37. Seligman, Authentic Happiness, 104.
   38. Seligman, Authentic Happiness, 111.
   39. Seligman, Authentic Happiness, 112.
   40. Seligman, Authentic Happiness, 112.
   41. Ting Zhang, “The Personal and Interpersonal Benefits of Rediscovery” (PhD diss., Harvard
University, 2015), 22, https://dash.harvard.edu/handle/1/17467290.
   42. Zhang, “The Personal and Interpersonal Benefits of Rediscovery.” 22.
   43. Zhang, “The Personal and Interpersonal Benefits of Rediscovery.” 22.



                                 4. The Experiencescape
   1. Tom O’Dell and Peter Billing, eds., Experiencescapes: Tourism, Culture, and Economy (Herndon, VA:
Copenhagen Business School Press, 2005), 16.
   2. This term was first used by Bob in a 1996 proposal to the U.S. Navy Morale, Welfare, and
Recreation operations for a workshop on recreation program development and was spelled with
the following twist: EXPERIENCESCAPES(QPD), Quality Program Design.
   3. O’Dell and Billing, Experiencescapes, 16.
   4. J. Robert Rossman and Barbara Elwood Schlatter, Recreation Programming: Designing and Staging
Leisure Experiences (Urbana, IL: Sagamore, 2015), 39–58.
   5. Rossman and Schlatter, Recreation Programming, 41–52. The genesis of these elements comes
from an article by Norman K. Denzin, “Play, Games, and Interaction: The Contexts of Childhood
Socialization,” Sociological Quarterly 16, no. 4 (1975): 458. Denzin drew from the collective works of
Erving Goffman, who had spent his career developing a dramaturgical view of sociology that
accounted for building society in the everyday occasions of face-to-face interaction. Several of
Goffman’s works that contributed to this effort are The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life (Garden
City, NY: Anchor Books, 1956); Interaction Ritual (Garden City, NY: Anchor Books, 1967); Relations in
Public (New York: Harper & Row, 1971); and Frame Analysis (New York: Harper & Row, 1974).
   6. The following two works examine this phenomenon: Bo Evardsson, Bård Tronvoll, and
Thorsten Gruber, “Expanding Understanding of Service Exchange and Value Co-creation: A Social
Constructionist Approach,” Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science 39, no. 2 (2011): 327; Wolff-
Michael Roth and Alfredo Jornet, “Towards a Theory of Experience,” Science Education 90 (2014):
106.
   7. Thomas Wendt, Design for Dasein: Understanding the Design of Experiences (New York: Wendt,
2015), 16.
   8. Wendt, Design for Dasein, 16.
   9. Albert Tsao, Jørgen Sugar, Li Lu, Cheng Wang, James J. Knierim, May-Britt Moser, and Edvard I.
Moser, “Integrating Time from Experience in the Lateral Entorhinal Cortex,” Nature (San Francisco:
Springer Nature, 2018).
   10. Sociology Index, s.v. “Generalized Other,” http://sociologyindex.com/generalized_other.htm.
   11. Roth and Jornet, “Towards a Theory of Experience,” 106.
   12. Claude Romano, L’evenement et le monde [Event and world] (Paris: Presses Universitaries de
France, 1998), 197. Trans. from French and quoted in Roth and Jornet, “Towards a Theory of
Experience,” 106.
   13. Roth and Jornet, “Towards a Theory of Experience,” 106.
   14. Nina Simon, The Participatory Museum (Santa Cruz, CA: Museum 2.0, 2010).
   15. Simon, The Participatory Museum, i–ii.
   16. David Meerman Scott, The New Rules of Marketing and PR (New York: Wiley, 2017), 15.
   17. Scott, New Rules of Marketing, 9.
   18. Scott, New Rules of Marketing, n.p.
                            5. Experience Design Thinking

   1. Harold G. Nelson and Erik Stolterman, The Design Way: Intentional Change in an Unpredictable
World, 2nd ed. (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2012), 12.
   2. Daniel Coyle, The Talent Code: Greatness Isn’t Born. It’s Grown. Here’s How (New York: Bantam,
2009).
   3. Tom Kelley and David Kelley, Creative Confidence: Unleashing the Creative Potential Within Us All
(New York: Crown Business, 2013).
   4. Eric Ries, The Lean Startup: How Today’s Entrepreneurs Use Continuous Innovation to Create Radically
Successful Businesses (New York: Crown Business, 2011).
   5. Horst W. J. Rittel and Melvin M. Webber, “Dilemmas in a General Theory of Planning,” Policy
Sciences 4, no. 2 (1973): 155.
   6. For more information on design thinking, check out these sources: Hasso Plattner Institute of
Design at Stanford, “A Virtual Crash Course in Design Thinking,” d.school,
https://dschool.stanford.edu/resources-collections/a-virtual-crash-course-in-design-thinking;
“Design Thinking,” IDEO, https://www.ideou.com/pages/design-thinking.
   7. Hasso Plattner Institute of Design at Stanford, “An Introduction to Design Thinking Process
Guide,”                        d.school,                       3,                      https://dschool-
old.stanford.edu/sandbox/groups/designresources/wiki/36873/attachments/74b3d/StageGuideBO
OTCAMP2010L.pdf.
   8. Merriam-Webster, s.v. “empathy,” https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/empathy.
   9. Mat D. Duerden, Peter J. Ward, and Patti A. Freeman, “Conceptualizing Structured
Experiences: Seeking Interdisciplinary Integration,” Journal of Leisure Research 47, no. 5 (2015): 601.
   10. The list of participant elements compiled by Duerden, Ward, and Freeman was built on the
work of the following researchers: Elizabeth C. Hirschman and Morris B. Holbrook, “Expanding the
Ontology and Methodology of Research on the Consumption Experience,” in Perspectives on
Methodology in Consumer Research, ed. David Brinberg and Richard J. Lutz (New York: Springer
Verlag, 1986), 213; and J. Robert Rossman and Barbara E. Schlatter, Recreation Programming: Designing
and Staging Leisure Experiences, 7th ed. (Urbana, IL: Sagamore, 2015).
   11. Clayton M. Christensen, Scott D. Anthony, Gerald Berstell, and Denise Nitterhouse, “Finding
the Right Job for Your Product,” MIT Sloan Management Review 48, no. 3 (2007): 38.
   12. John Connors, in discussion with Mat Duerden, October 2013.
   13. Hasso Plattner Institute, “An Introduction to Design Thinking,” 3.
   14. Dave Gray, “Update to the Empathy Map,” July 18, 2017, Gamestorming,
http://gamestorming.com/update-to-the-empathy-map.
   15. Hasso Plattner Institute of Design at Stanford, “The Bootcamp Bootleg,” 21, d.school,
https://static1.squarespace.com/static/57c6b79629687fde090a0fdd/t/58890239db29d6cc6c3338f7/
1485374014340/METHODCARDS-v3-slim.pdf.
   16. Hasso Plattner Institute, “The Bootcamp Bootleg.”
   17. Hasso Plattner Institute, “The Bootcamp Bootleg.”
  18. Thomas Wendt, Design for Dasein: Understanding the Design of Experiences (New York: Wendt,
2015), 9.
  19. Wendt, Design for Dasein, 73.
  20. Karen Collias, “Unpacking Design Thinking: Ideate,” August 3, 2014, Knowledge Without
Borders, http://knowwithoutborders.org/unpacking-design-thinking-ideate.
  21. Hasso Plattner Institute, “The Bootcamp Bootleg,” 30.
  22. Hasso Plattner Institute, “The Bootcamp Bootleg,” 30.
  23. Eric Ries, The Lean Startup: How Today’s Entrepreneurs Use Continuous Innovation to Create
Radically Successful Businesses (New York: Crown Business, 2011), 4.
  24. Hasso Plattner Institute, “An Introduction to Design Thinking,” 7.
  25. Seymour Papert and Idit Harel, Constructionism (Norwood, NJ: Ablex, 1991).
  26. Rossman and Schlatter, Recreation Programming.




                       6. Designing the Experience Journey

   1. Jason Cohen, “Holy Crap,” Texas Monthly, October 2013, www.texasmonthly.com/travel/holy-
crap.
   2. Theodore Kinni, Be Our Guest: Perfecting the Art of Customer Service, rev. ed. (New York: Disney
Press, 2011), 23.
   3. Kinni, Be Our Guest, 23.
   4. The following two sources discuss various types of experience maps: James Kalbach, Mapping
Experiences: A Complete Guide to Creating Value Through Journeys, Blueprints, and Diagrams (Sebastopol,
CA: O’Reilly Media, 2016); Brian Solis, X: The Experience When Business Meets Design (Hoboken, NJ:
Wiley, 2015).
   5. Kalbach, Mapping Experiences, 89.
   6. Kalbach, Mapping Experiences, 91.
   7. Chip Heath and Dan Heath, The Power of Moments (New York: Simon & Schuster, 2017).
   8. Solis, When Business Meets Design.
   9. John Connors, Mat Duerden, Peter Ward, and Brian Hill, “Creating Lasting Customer
Relationships: Lessons Learned from The Color Run” (workshop at the National Recreation and
Parks Association Conference, Las Vegas, NV, 2015).
   10. Connors, Duerden, Ward, and Hill, “Creating Lasting Customer Relationships.”
   11.       Heather       Long,       “Disney      World       Secrets,”       Love     to      Know,
http://themeparks.lovetoknow.com/Disney_World_Secrets.
   12. Designing CX, “CX Journey Mapping Workshop Slides,” Designing CX,
http://designingcx.com/cx-journey-mapping-toolkit.
   13. Designing CX, “CX Journey Mapping Workshop Slides.”
   14. B. Joseph Pine II and James H. Gilmore, The Experience Economy, updated ed. (Boston: Harvard
Business Review Press, 2011).
                           7. Touchpoints and Transitions

   1. J. Robert Rossman and Barbara E. Schlatter, Recreation Programming: Designing and Staging
Leisure Experiences, 7th ed. (Urbana, IL: Sagamore, 2015), 217–26.
   2. Stephen R. Covey, The 8th Habit (New York: Free Press, 2004), 152.
   3. Business Dictionary, s.v. “co-creation,” www.businessdictionary.com/definition/co-
creation.html.
   4. Coimbatore K. Prahalad and Venkat Ramaswamy, “Co-creation Experiences: The Next Practice
in Value Creation,” Journal of Interactive Marketing 18, no. 3 (2004): 6.
   5. Prahalad and Ramaswamy, “Co-creation Experiences,” 9.
   6. Clay Shirky, Cognitive Surplus: Creativity and Generosity in a Connected Age (New York: Penguin,
2010), 58.
   7. Younger readers may not know of Cheers or its impact. It was one of the most successful
sitcoms ever on TV, running from September 30, 1982, to May 20, 1993, with a total of 275 half-hour
episodes for eleven seasons. Norm, Cliff, and Frasier were bar customers who added value to
coming to Cheers, the bar where “everybody knows your name.” The series was so popular that you
can still go to a Cheers bar in Boston that celebrates the series. You can learn more at
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cheers.
   8. If you are ever in Buenos Aires, you too can participate by contacting Mrs. Soued at the
following e-mail address: normasoued@gmail.com. You can see pictures of the class at
http://argentinecookingclasses.com.
   9. CBS News, “Falconry and Fire-Swallowing: How Airbnb’s ‘Experiences’ Are Transforming the
Platform,” CBS News, August 29, 2018, https://www.cbsnews.com/news/airbnb-experiences-
provide-boost-for-platform.
   10. Andrew Lacanienta and Mat Duerden, “Designing and Staging High Quality Park and
Recreation Experiences Using Co-Creation,” Journal of Park and Recreation Administration (in press).
   11. Pine and Gilmore call this concept “customer sacrifice.” B. Joseph Pine II and James H.
Gilmore, The Experience Economy, updated ed. (Boston: Harvard Business Review Press, 2011).




     8. The Stories We Tell: Building Drama in Your Experiences

   1. Charles Dickens, A Tale of Two Cities (London: Nisbet, 1902), 3.
   2. J. R. R. Tolkien, The Hobbit (New York: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2001), 1.
   3. Star Wars, Episode IV: A New Hope, directed by George Lucas (Los Angeles: 20th Century Fox,
1977).
   4. Coimbatore K. Prahalad and Venkat Ramaswamy, “Co-creation Experiences: The Next Practice
in Value Creation,” Journal of Interactive Marketing 18, no. 3 (2004): 5.
   5. Emily Esfahani Smith, The Power of Meaning: Creating a Life That Matters (New York: Crown,
2017), 41.
   6. Smith, The Power of Meaning, 104.
   7. Brian Solis, X: The Experience When Business Meets Design (Hoboken, NJ: Wiley, 2015).
   8. Devin Leonard and Christopher Palmeri, “Disney’s Intergalactic Theme Park Quest to Beat
Harry           Potter,”         Bloomberg         Businessweek,        April          19,       2017,
https://www.bloomberg.com/news/features/2017-04-19/disney-s-intergalactic-theme-park-
quest-to-beat-harry-potter.
   9. Leonard and Palmeri, “Disney’s Intergalactic Theme Park Quest.”
   10. Leonard and Palmeri, “Disney’s Intergalactic Theme Park Quest.”
   11. Gustav Freytag, Freytag’s Technique of the Drama: An Exposition of Dramatic Composition and Art,
trans. Elias J. MacEwan (Chicago: S. C. Griggs, 1895).
   12. Joseph Campbell, The Hero with a Thousand Faces, 3rd ed. (Novato, CA: New World Library,
2008).
   13. Christopher Vogler, “A Practical Guide to Joseph Campbell’s The Hero with a Thousand Faces,”
The Writer’s Journey, 1985, http://www.thewritersjourney.com/hero%27s_journey.htm#Memo.
   14. Alex Ferrari, “The Power of Myth: Creating Star Wars’ Mythos with Joseph Campbell,” Indie
Film Hustle, December 7, 2017, 3, https://indiefilmhustle.com/the-power-of-myth-star-wars-
joseph-campbell.
   15. Google Search Stories, “Parisian Love,” YouTube video, https://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=nnsSUqgkDwU.
   16. For an excellent discussion of theming, see chapter 3 in B. Joseph Pine II and James H.
Gilmore, The Experience Economy, updated ed. (Boston: Harvard Business Review Press, 2011).
   17. For some great insights on the power of constraints to fuel creativity, read Tom Kelly and
David Kelly, Creative Confidence: Unleashing the Creative Potential Within Us All (New York: Crown
Business, 2013), 126–29.
   18. Polynesian Cultural Center, “About Us,” Polynesian Cultural Center, www.polynesia.com/FAQ-
About-Us.html#.WU2vEsbMx0s.
   19.        Polynesian         Cultural      Center,        “About,”     Hukilau         Marketplace,
http://hukilaumarketplace.com/about.
   20. Mike Lee, personal communication with Mat. Mike Lee serves on the advisory board for the
Department of Experience Design and Management in the Marriott School of Business at Brigham
Young University, Provo, UT, where Mat teaches.
   21. Anastasia Kreposhina (project manager, IKEA Centres Russia), personal communication with
Mat, November 9, 2016.
   22. Scott Lukas, The Immersive Worlds Handbook: Designing Theme Parks and Consumer Spaces (New
York: Focal Press, 2013).




                   9. Techniques for Enhancing Experiences
    1. Christopher Carroll, Malcolm Patterson, Stephen Wood, Andrew Booth, Jo Rick, and Shashi
Balain, “A Conceptual Framework for Implementation Fidelity,” Implementation Science 2, no. 1
(2007): 40.
    2. B. Joseph Pine II and James H. Gilmore, The Experience Economy, updated ed. (Boston, MA:
Harvard Business Review Press, 2011).
    3. For more information on the work of these individuals, see Anantharanthan Parasuraman,
Valarie A. Zeithaml, and Leonard L. Berry, “SERVQUAL: A Multiple-Item Scale for Measuring
Consumer Perceptions,” Journal of Retailing 64, no. 1 (1988): 12; and Anantharanthan Parasuraman,
Leonard L. Berry, and Valarie A. Zeithaml, “Refinement and Reassessment of the SERVQUAL Scale,”
Journal of Retailing 67, no. 4 (1991): 420.
    4. Gary D. Ellis and J. Robert Rossman, “Creating Value for Participants Through Experience
Staging: Parks, Recreation, and Tourism in the Experience Industry,” Journal of Park and Recreation
Administration 26, no. 4 (2008): 1.
    5. Ellis and Rossman, “Creating Value for Participants,” 10.
    6. Merriam-Webster, s.v. “service,” https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/service.
    7. Parasuraman, Zeithaml, and Berry, “SERVQUAL,” 12.
    8. Daniel Victor and Matt Stevens, “United Airlines Passenger Is Dragged from an Overbooked
Flight,” New York Times, April 19, 2017, https://www.nytimes.com/2017/04/10/business/united-
flight-passenger-dragged.html?_r=0.
    9. Mary Jo Bitner, Bernard H. Booms, and Mary Stanfield Tetreault, “The Service Encounter:
Diagnosing Favorable and Unfavorable Incidents,” Journal of Marketing 54 (1990): 71–84.
    10. Seth King, Sam Williams, and Callan Graham, “Lessons Learned Designing Questival,”
Keynote Address, Experience Design Quest, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah, April 14, 2018.
    11. Pine and Gilmore, The Experience Economy, updated ed.
    12. Pine and Gilmore, The Experience Economy, updated ed.
    13. David Meerman Scott, The New Rules of Marketing and PR (New York: Wiley, 2017), 49.
    14. B. Joseph Pine II, Mass Customization: The New Frontier in Business Competition (Boston: Harvard
Business School Press, 1993).
    15. Barry Schwartz, The Paradox of Choice: Why Less Is More (New York: Ecco, 2004).
    16. David Kelley and Tom Kelley, Creative Confidence: Unleashing the Creative Potential Within Us All
(New York: Crown Business, 2013).
    17. Parasuraman, Berry, and Zeithaml, “Refinement and Reassessment of the SERVQUAL Scale.”
    18. Chip Heath and Dan Heath, The Power of Moments: Why Certain Experiences Have Extraordinary
Impact (New York: Simon & Schuster, 2017).
    19. Heath and Heath, The Power of Moments.
    20. Pine and Gilmore, The Experience Economy, updated ed.
    21. We are grateful to an anonymous reviewer who evidently attends a lot more weddings than
we do and brought us up to date about wedding practices these days.
    22. Joe Coscarelli and Melena Ryzik, “Fyre Festival, a Luxury Music Weekend, Crumbles in the
Bahamas,” New York Times, April 28, 2017, https://www.nytimes.com/2017/04/28/arts/music/fyre-
festival-ja-rule-bahamas.html.
   23. See the following articles for more information on the Fyre Festival fallout: Jonathan
Randles, “Fyre Festival Placed in Bankruptcy After Lending Pressure,” Wall Street Journal, August 30,
2017,      https://www.wsj.com/articles/fyre-festival-placed-in-bankruptcy-after-lender-pressure-
1504130632; Amy B. Wang, “Founder of Disastrous Fyre Festival Arrested, Charged with Fraud,”
Washington      Post,     July     1,    2017,    https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/arts-and-
entertainment/wp/2017/07/01/founder-of-disastrous-fyre-festival-arrested-and-charged-with-
fraud/; Lizzie Plaugic, “Ja Rule’s Catastrophic Fyre Festival Gets a Documentary Series on Hulu,” The
Verge, April 16, 2018, https://www.theverge.com/2018/4/16/17243802/hulu-fyre-festival-
documentary-series-ja-rule-billy-mcfarland.



       10. Using Experience Design in Product Development and
                         Corporate Strategy

   1. B. Joseph Pine II and James Gilmore, “The Roles of the Chief Experience Officer,” AMA Quarterly
(Winter 2017–2018): 5–10.
   2.      Fox     Restaurant     Concepts,      “About    Us,”     Fox     Restaurant       Concepts,
https://www.foxrc.com/about-us.
   3. Fox Restaurant Concepts, “About Us.”
   4. B. Joseph Pine II and James H. Gilmore, The Experience Economy, updated ed. (Boston: Harvard
Business Review Press, 2011).
   5. Brinker International, “Making People Feel Special,” Brinker International,
http://www.brinker.com/company/default.html.
   6.     Wayne,     T.    Roberts,    “2016      Annual    Report,”    Brinker     International,    2,
https://www.proxydocs.com/edocs/request?
b=EAT&paction=doc&action=showdoc&docid=1053778&se=1053778.
   7. Roberts, “2016 Annual Report.”
   8. Elizabeth Weise, “Amazon’s Checkout-Free Amazon Go Stores Coming to San Francisco and
Chicago,”                USA              Today,              May               14,                2018,
https://www.usatoday.com/story/tech/talkingtech/2018/05/14/checkout-free-amazon-go-stores-
coming-san-francisco-chicago/609794002.
   9. Hasbro, “Corporate,” Hasbro, https://hasbro.gcs-web.com/corporate.
   10. Anne Quito, “Why Hasbro Trademarked Play-Doh’s Scent,” Quartz, May 28, 2018,
https://qz.com/1290460/why-hasbro-trademarked-play-dohs-scent.
   11. Jennifer Fickley-Baker, “Star Wars–Inspired Resort Planned for Walt Disney World Resort
Promises to Be ‘Unlike Anything That Exists Today,’” Disney Parks Blog, February 11, 2018,
https://disneyparks.disney.go.com/blog/2018/02/d23j-update-star-wars-hotel.
   12.       Holland      America      Line,      “About     Us,”     Holland       America        Line,
https://www.hollandamerica.com/en_US/our-company/mission-values.html.
   13. Lennar, “Simplicity,” Lennar, https://www.lennar.com/ei/simplicity.
   14. Kris Frieswick, “Deals on Wheels,” National Geographic, May 19,              2018,
https://www.nationalgeographic.com/travel/features/far-and-away/deals-on-wheels.




                                      Conclusion

   1.    Just       Disney,      “Walt’s     Private   Apartment,”      Just       Disney,
http://www.justdisney.com/features/apartment.html.
                                          Index


Page numbers refer to the print edition but are hyperlinked to the appropriate location in
the e-book.

action, 34, 44; actionable artifacts, 84; falling action, 129, 130; rising action, 129, 130
action and awareness, merging of, 18
activities, 79
Adaptivepath.org, 92
Adobe Experience Cloud, 174–75
adults, 17
advertisements, 46
affordance, 112–13, 150; co-creation and, 114
agency, 23
Airbnb, 110
Air New Zealand, 35
airports, 142
Amazon, 3, 4, 173
American Airlines, 149
amusement parks, 72
anticipation, 10; creating, 116; deep experiences and, 152; experience mapping and, 97; positive
   memory and, 153; transition to participation, 11
Apple, 3, 4
artistic factors, 148, 148; experiencescapes and, 172
artistic performance, 138
attention directing, 32
attentiveness, 146
audio tours, 71
Authentic Happiness (Seligman), 20, 48
autonomy, 22
auto racing, 65
awareness, 32
Bach, Johann Sebastian, 88
backstage contributors, 61, 92, 100, 108, 119
backstories, 134, 135
bad experiences, 37; higher-magnitude, 41
Bahamas, 158
Bain & Company, 3
Baird, Sharon, 178
baptism, 154
bar mitzvahs, 154
basketball, 65, 66; four-corner offense, 68; rules and, 67
bat mitzvahs, 154
behavioral nature of experience, 1
Benz, Peter, 14
Berkeley, George, 31
Berry, Leonard L., 138
Bersin, Josh, 7
big-box stores, 141
Bigsley Event House, 80, 97
birthdays, 156
blocking, 59, 60, 70–71, 119
Bloomberg Businessweek, 128
Blumer, Herbert, 43
board games, 68
bookkeeping, 146
brag points, 153
brand ambassadors, 4
brand loyalty, 3
Brigham Young University, 78
Brinker International, 172
Brown, Graham, 28
Buc-ee’s Travel Centers, 89–90, 147
Business Dictionary, 28, 109

Campbell, Joseph, 131
Carroll, Dave, 7
cash registers, 141
Center for Cultural Studies & Analysis, 128
characterizing, 148
check-in procedure, 82
Cheers (television show), 110
chess, 68
chief experience officers, 175
children, 17, 82; children’s summer craft programs, 149–50; children’s toy manufacturers, 60;
   Disney theme parks and, 36; parents and, 61
Chili’s, 172
choice, 23
Christensen, Clayton, 80
Christianity, 154
Christmas, 156
chronological location, 62
churches, 60
Chutes and Ladders©, 173
Cirque, Le, 174
Clancy, Tom, 125
clear goals, 18
climax, 129, 130
co-actualization, 111
co-creation, 37, 43, 46, 104, 109, 110; affordance and, 114; degrees of, 119–20; Golf Buddy© and, 162
co-curation, 110, 111
co-design, 110
coffee, 5
cognitive engagement, 51
Cohen, Jason, 90
collaborative whiteboard platforms, 96
collateral outcomes, 96
Color Run, TheTM (TCR), 97, 98–99, 126
Color Run Event Model, The, 97, 98, 126
Comic Con, 45
coming-of-age, 154
“Coming to Grips with Quantum Mechanics,” 31–32
commodities, 5
communication: content, 141; effective, 140; enhancements and, 165
competence, 22, 107
computer games, 72
computers, 150
concentration, 23
connection, 155
Connors, John, 80, 97, 98
consciousness, 32
constructivism, 85
convergence, 84
conversation, 151
corporations, 171; corporate relationships, 175; corporate strategy, 160; strategic initiatives, 176
Costco, 3, 4
Cotopaxi, 145
Covey, Steven, 47, 107
Creative Confidence (Kelly, T., and Kelly, D.), 76
creativity, 75–76, 90; constraints on, 135; expression of, 137
credibility, 143–44
Csikszentmihalyi, Mihaly, 18, 19
cultural celebrations, 154
cultural institutions, 71
customers, 15, 149; customer-company interactions, 13; customer experience design, 13; customer
   feedback loops, 111; employees and, 142; initial expectations of, 151; loyalty of, 144; repeat, 82;
   social media, customer feedback on, 98; Solis and, 127; stories and, 127; unique issues of, 145
customization, 27, 112, 113, 148; creating, 150; decisions and, 151; expensive, 151; touchpoints and,
   149
cycling, 175

data reduction, 81
Deci, Edward, 21–22
decisions, 151
declarative memory, 25
deep experiences, 152
defining: defining moments, 155; experience design, 12–13, 14; experiences, difficulty of, 8;
   experiences, multiphased, 9; stage of, 80
Deloitte Insights, 7, 27
Delta, 35
demographics, 93, 94
dénouement, 129, 130
departing interactions, 152
Department of Motor Vehicles (DMV), 139
Design for Dasein (Wendt), 62
Designingcx.com, 92, 100
design thinking, 55, 74, 75, 87; frameworks for, 78; human-centered design and, 77. See also
   experience design thinking
Design Way, The (Nelson and Stolterman), 14
Dewey, John, 33, 34
Dickens, Charles, 39
“Dilemmas in a General Theory of Planning” (Webber and Rittel), 76
Diller, Steve, 42
dining experience, 12
discovery, 38
Disney, Walt, 90, 99, 128, 178
Disney theme parks, 36, 63, 134; Disneyland, 69, 99, 128, 143, 178; Disneyworld, 128, 129; rides in, 72;
   Universal Studios and, 129; Walt Disney World, 173
distraction, 155
DMV. See Department of Motor Vehicles
Dolan, Paul, 20
dramatic structure, 130
driver’s license, 139
d.school, 78, 80; convergence and, 84; “Introduction to Design Thinking Process Guide,” 85
Dunn, Elizabeth, 7

Easter sunrise services, 62
Ebenezer Scrooge (fictional character), 39
economic activity, 5
economic progression, 5
Edison, Thomas, 76
effortful mental activity, 34, 35
elevation, 155
Ellis, Gary, 6, 138
Ellis, Michael, 17, 19
emotions, 49, 79; emotional labor, 47; memory and, 36; positive, 22, 107; system 2 thinking and, 35,
    37
empathy, 78, 79, 148; gathering empathy data, 82; importance of, 151; map, 81, 84
employees, 118; customers and, 142; frontline employees, 15; inadequately trained sales associates,
    141; incompetence, 141; nonwork experiences and, 157; poorly trained, 142; safety, 147
employers, 142
end users, 15; end-user reactions, 100, 104; interactions with, 143
engagement, 40, 41, 43, 44, 45; cognitive, 51; higher-order experiences and, 45; three-phase model
    of, 44, 45
Enger, Leif, 125
enhancements, 120, 138, 159; communication and, 165
episodic memory, 25, 26
event-leadership training, 143
expectations, 116; baseline service experience expectations, 148; customers, initial expectations of,
    151; meeting, 152; reliability and, 145
experience attributes, 40
experience deepening, 148
Experience Design: Concepts and Case Studies (Benz), 14
experience design thinking, 87, 138; effort required for, 158
experience economy, 1, 127
Experience Economy, The: Work Is Theatre and Every Business a Stage (Pine and Gilmore), 26, 156
experience environments, 125
experience mapping, 55, 85–86, 101; anticipation and, 97; application of, 121; comprehensive, 101;
   elements of, 92; intentionality and, 94; participation and, 97; reflection and, 97; storyboarding
   and, 109; touchpoints and, 95
experience peaks, 142
experience sampling, 18
experiencescapes, 55, 74; artistic factors and, 172; creating, 58; elements of, 59, 60, 108, 118, 162;
   touchpoints and, 98
experience stager, 15
experience staging, 15; theater and, 29
experience-staging roles, 148
experiential marketing, 157
experiential storytellers, 121
exposition, 129, 130
Eysenck, Michael, 42

facilitating constraint, 135
failure, benefits of, 76
falling action, 129, 130
figure skating, 138
“Finding the Right Job for Your Product” (Christensen), 80
Florida, Richard, 45
Flourish (Seligman), 21
flow, 18, 26; flow-inducing experiences, 49
focus-groups, 86
football, 61
Ford, Henry, 72
formal acknowledgments, 153
Founders Day, 154
Fourth of July, 156
Fox Restaurant Concepts, 171
framing, 105
frequency and impact, 40, 41
Freytag, Gustav, 129
frontline employees, 15
frontstage contributors, 92, 100, 108, 119; courteous, 143; experience peaks and, 142; operational
    policies and, 146; training, 151
front story, 134
Fyre Festival, 158
games, 67; board games, 68; computer, 72; video games, 149
Gen Xers, 110
Gilmore, James H., 5, 26–27, 100, 138, 156
Global Human Capital Trends, 7
Golf Buddy©, 74; co-creation and, 162; configurations of, 161; meaningful experiences and, 165;
   memorable experiences and, 165; product development process of, 160; seamless use of, 170;
   turning on, 165
golfers, 160, 170; professional, 161; taking fewer shots, 162; tee shot, 165
Google, 131, 134
gratification, 48, 49; meaningful experiences and, 50, 51; transformational experiences and, 50, 51
Gray, Dave, 81
Great Exuma, 158
guided tourist trips, 69; walking-tour groups, 72

Hanukkah, 156
happiness, 20
Happiness by Design (Dolan), 20
Harlem Globetrotters, 45
harmony, 152
Harvard Business Review, 47
Harvard Business School, 80
Hasbro, 173
Hasso Plattner Institute of Design at Stanford University, 77
Hawaii, 135
Heath, Chip, 20, 24, 36, 152; on memorializing microexperiences, 155
Heath, Dan, 20, 24, 36, 152; on memorializing microexperiences, 155
H-E-B, 3, 4
hedonic treadmill, 42, 43
hero’s journey, 131; steps of, 132–33
Hero with a Thousand Faces, The (Campbell), 131
heterogeneity, 89, 90–91
higher-order experiences, 39, 41, 44; cognitive engagement needed for, 51; engagement and, 45;
   microexperience and, 46; pleasure and, 50
high-quality experiences, 8
high-risk passengers, 147
hiking outfitters, 149
Hochschild, Arlie, 47
Holland America Line, 174
home building, 174
hotels, 146
housekeeping, 146
Huckleberry Finn (Twain), 125
Hulu, 158
human-centered design, 77
human-computer interactions, 13
humor, 52
Hunt for Red October, The (Clancy), 125

icebreaker activities, 70
ideation, 82–83; convergent, 84; enhancements to, 138
IKEA, 135–36
I Love Lucy (television show), 72
immediate feedback, 18
immersive experiences, 130, 136
Immersive Worlds Handbook, The (Lukas), 136
implementation infidelity, 138
inadequately trained sales associates, 141
incompetence, 141
industrial economy, 5
influencers, 158
innovation, 90; constraints and, 135
insight, 155
intake, 43, 44
intentionality, 89, 92; experience mapping and, 94
interactions, 10, 13, 32, 108; departing, 152; designed, 119; desired reactions and, 162; with end-
    users, 143; microexperience, 142; technology and, 113
intrinsic motivation, 18, 22
“Introduction to Design Thinking Process Guide” (d.school), 85
investing in experiences, 7

JetBlue, 3, 4
Jewish faith, 154
Jones, Jenkins Lloyd, 40
Jornet, Alfredo, 70
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 42
Jungle Cruise, 69

Kahneman, Daniel, 23, 24, 33
Kalbach, Jim, 92
Kalvi Institute for Systems Neuroscience, 25, 26
Kelly, David, 76, 77
Kelly, John R., 28
Kelly, Tom, 76
King, Margaret, 128
King, Seth, 145

Lacanienta, Andrew, 110
laws, 67
Lee, Harper, 125
Lee, Mike, 135
Lennar, 174
Leonard, Devin, 128
linear configuration, 96
long-term memory, 25
Lord of the Rings, The (Tolkien), 131
lower-order experiences, 51
Lucas, George, 131
luck, 68
Lukas, Scott, 136

macroexperiences, 10, 10, 30; design of, 127; mapping, 87; primary macroexperience results, 95;
  structure of, 102
Maggiano’s Little Italy, 172
Magic Pass©, 45
Managed Heart, The (Hochschild), 47
“Manage Your Energy, Not Your Time” (Schwartz, T., and McCarthy), 47
manufacturing goods, 5
Mapping Experiences (Kalbach), 92, 93
marketing and consumer-behavior literature, 24
Marvel movies, 131
McCarthy, Catherine, 47
McFarland, Billy, 158
Mead, George Herbert, 43
meaning, 22
meaningful experiences, 32; discovery and, 38; Golf Buddy© and, 165; gratification and, 50, 51; key
  characteristics of, 39, 40; memorable experiences and, 37
memorable experiences, 32; Golf Buddy© and, 165; key characteristics of, 33, 35, 39, 40; meaningful
  experiences and, 37
memorializing, 148
memorializing microexperiences, 155
memory, 24, 25, 33, 79; emotions and, 36; influencing, 152; memorable experiences, 26; positive,
  153; rote memorization, 38; unique, 153, 157
Merton, Robert, 13
microexperiences, 10, 10, 11; building blocks of, 102; heterogeneity among, 91; higher-order
   experiences, 46; interactions, 142; memorializing, 155; prosaic experience and, 51; religious, 154;
   sequencing, 95; touchpoint template and, 105
milkshakes, 80
millennials, 110
mindful behavior, 66
mindful experiences, 32, 34, 35, 46; key characteristics of, 39, 40; pleasure and, 50
minimum viable products, 85
MLD Worldwide, 135
monomyth, 131
Monopoly©, 173
Mouseketeers, 178
multiculturalism, 67
multiphased experiences, 9
multiple discoveries, 13
Murphy’s law, 144
musical composition, 89

narrative frameworks, 127
National Parks Service, 111
needs and pain points, 93, 94
need-to-know basis, 140
negative reviews, 11
Nelson, Harold G., 14
Netflix, 3, 4, 18
Net Promoter Score® (NPS), 3–4
neuroscience, 25
New Rules of Marketing & PR, The (Scott), 73
night golf, 63
Nilsen, Rita Elmkvist, 25
nonwork experiences, 157
Norton, Michael, 7
novelty, 40, 41, 42; hedonic treadmill and, 43; system 2 thinking and, 42
NPS. See Net Promoter Score®
Nye, Bill, 34–35

objects, 59, 60, 118–19; types of, 64–65
O’Dell, Tom, 58
onboard entertainment, 149
one-on-one contact, 144
online shopping, 150
operational policies, 146
Oracle, 99
origin stories, 134
Orman, Suze, 71–72
Ouellette, Jennifer, 25
outdoor adventure experiences, 143, 149

painting, 103
Palmeri, Christopher, 128
Papert, Seymour, 85
papier-mâché creations, 127
Paradox of Choice, The (Schwartz, B.), 151
Parasuraman, Anantharanthan, 138, 139
parents, 61
“Parisian Love” (Super Bowl ad), 131
participation, 6, 15; anticipation transition to, 11; deep experiences and, 152; designing, 152;
   interactions in, 10; intrinsically motivated, 18; stories and, 126, 130; in touchpoints, 97
Participatory Museum, The (Simon), 71
PCC. See Polynesian Cultural Center
Peace Like a River (Enger), 125
peak-end rule, 96
people, 59, 60, 118; characteristics of, 61; cohorts of, 60; information on, 62
performance capabilities, 74
PERMA model, 21
personal characteristics, 79
personal experience, 25
personal identity, 37
personal reflection, 38
personas, 60, 92–93; template for, 94
photographs, 153–54
physical objects, 64–65
Piaget, Jean, 85
Picasso, Pablo, 121
piñatas, 127
Pine, B. Joseph, II, 5, 26–27, 100, 138, 156
place, 59, 60, 62, 118; elements of, 64; physical location, 63–64; role of, 155
Planck, Max, 32
playdough, 173
Play Research Lab, 17
pleasure, 48; bodily, 49; higher, 49; higher-order experiences and, 50; mindful experiences and, 50
pleasure-pain principle (PPP), 20
pointillism, 103
point of view (POV) statement, 81–82; potential solutions to, 83
Polynesian Cultural Center (PCC), 135
positive emotions, 22, 107
positive perceived result, 11
Post-it voting, 84
POV. See point of view
Power of Meaning: Creating a Life That Matters, The (Smith, E.), 126
Power of Moments, The (Heath, C., and Heath, D.), 20
PPP. See pleasure-pain principle
Prahalad, C. K., 109, 125
predictable errors, 144
pride, 155
problem-solution paradox, 83
producing experience, 28–29
product development, 160
production, 28
prosaic experiences, 1, 32, 33, 46; key characteristics of, 39, 40; microexperiences and, 51;
   transformational experiences and, 40
proto-persona, 93
prototyping, 84, 121; enhancements to, 138; feedback from, 85; testing, 86
psychographics, 93, 94
psychological functioning, 22
psychological needs, 22
psychology of experience, 1; social, 17
public bathrooms, 89

Quinceañera, 154

Rabner, Ben, 174–75
Ramaswamy, Venkat, 109, 125
Ramsey, Dave, 71
Ratatouille (2007), 63
rational thought processing, 24
Ratner, Paul, 7
reactions, 92, 97, 99; desired, 105, 107–8; end-user reactions, 100, 104; interactions and desired
   reactions, 162
recalling experiences, 153
recommendations, 145
recreational experiences, 175
reflection, 10, 12, 49; deep experiences and, 152; experience mapping and, 97; personal, 38; positive
    memory and, 153
Reichheld, Fred, 3
relationships, 22, 59, 60, 79, 107; building, 119; corporate relationships, 175; strengthened, 155
relevant behaviors, 93, 94
reliability, 145
religious microexperiences, 154
Renaissance festivals, 157
required energy, 40, 46, 46
responsiveness, 145; appropriate, 146
restaurants, 11; Brinker International, 172; design of, 136; responsiveness in, 146; restaurant
    experiences, 100
results, 40, 48, 49; desired, 118
retail brick-and-mortar stores, 150
Rhea, Darrel, 42
Ries, Eric, 85
Rise of the Creative Class, The (Florida), 45
rising action, 129, 130
risk, 143
rites of passage, 154
Rittel, Horst, 76
Ritz Carlton, 3, 4
Roberts, Wyman T., 172
robes, 154
role-playing, 86
Romano, Claude, 70
Roth, Wolff-Michael, 70
rules, 59, 60, 67, 119
Ryan, Richard, 21–22

safety, 147
sameness, 157
San Francisco, 173
Schlatter, Barbara, 43, 59, 105
Schlatter, Bob, 43
Schwartz, Barry, 27, 151
Schwartz, Tony, 47
science museums, 71
Scientific American (magazine), 31
Scott, David Meerman, 73
Scrabble©, 173
Seattle, 173
SeaWorld Entertainment Inc., 128
security, 142–43; basic need for, 146; TSA, 147
self-consciousness, 18
Seligman, Martin E. P., 20, 21, 37, 48
semantic memory, 25
sensitizing, 148; importance of, 155
sensory cues, 155
services, 5–6; baseline service experience expectations, 148; delivering, 29; positive service
   encounters, 13; service experience design, 13; technical service factors, 139–40, 140
Seurat, Georges, 103, 104
Shedroff, Nathan, 42
Shirky, Clay, 6, 78, 109
short-term memory, 25
signage, 141
Simon, Nina, 71
situated activity system, 58
small-town festivals, 157
Smith, Dean, 68
Smith, Esfahani, 126
Snakes and Ladders, 68
social bonding, 20; building, 155
social media, 52, 73, 152; customer feedback on, 98; influencers, 158
social norms, 67
social objects, 64–65
social roles, 68
sociopsychological space, 152
Solis, Brian, 13, 27; customers and, 127
Sonder (dance performance), 28
Soued, Norma, 110
Southwest Airlines, 149
souvenirs, 153
Spotify, 27
staging strategies, 148, 178
Starbucks, 5
Star Wars (film series), 131, 173–74
Stolterman, Erik, 14
stories: authentic, 127; backstories, 134, 135; customers and, 127; front story, 134; hero’s journey,
   131, 132–33; mediums of, 126; origin stories, 134; participation and, 126, 130; phases of, 129, 130;
   power of, 125; pre-existing, 129, 136; story-driven experiences, 128; storytellers, 136
storyboarding, 109
Sunday on La Grande Jatte, A (Seurat), 103, 104
Super Bowl, 131
surprise, 155
sustainable experiences, 19
Swiss Army knife, 113
symbolic interaction, 32, 43
symbolic objects, 64–65
system 1 thinking, 23–24, 33, 34
system 2 thinking, 23–24, 34; emotion and, 35, 37; novelty and, 42; short-term memory and, 25

“Take Me Out to the Ball Game” (song), 66
tame problems, 76–77
tangibles, 147
targeted outcomes, 95
TCR. See Color Run, TheTM
technical factors, 148
technical performance, 138
technical service factors, 139–40, 140
Technik des Dramas, Die (Freytag), 129
technology, 113
tee shirts, 153
testing, 86; enhancements to, 138
Texas A & M University, 6
Texas Monthly magazine, 89
texting, 152
Thanksgiving, 66
theater, 28; experience staging and, 29
theme-park designers, 130
theming, 148, 156; lack of, 157
thinking-processing-planning, 44
thoughts, 79
time, distortion of, 18
Times Square, 63
Ting Zhang, 52
To Kill a Mockingbird (Lee, H.), 125
Tolkien, J. R. R., 131
touchpoints, 92, 95–96; customization and, 149; delivering, 108; designing, 116; experiencescapes
   and, 98; iterating between, 165, 170; microexperiences and touchpoint templates, 105;
   participation in, 97; specifics of, 162; surprise, 155; tangibles and, 147; templates, 55, 104, 106,
   107, 115–16, 117, 163, 164, 166–69
Toy Story (movie franchise), 72
transformational experiences, 1, 32, 38; gratification and, 50, 51; key characteristics of, 39, 40;
   prosaic experiences and, 40; recognition of, 52
transitions, 114–15, 120, 165
Transportation Security Administration (TSA), 147
trash cans, 99
TSA. See Transportation Security Administration
Tsao, Albert, 25–26
Twain, Mark, 125
two-category experience-enhancements framework, 138

unauthentic experiences, 127
uniqueness, 90
United Airlines, 7, 144
Universal Studios, 128, 134; Disney theme parks and, 129
university commencement exercises, 143, 154, 156
University of North Carolina, 67–68
USAA, 3, 4
user experience design (UX design), 13

Valentine’s Day, 156
values, 79
variety, 90
venues, 63, 74, 156; security and, 142; tangibles and, 147
video games, 149
videos, 153
Virgin America, 35
virtual-reality experiences, 72
Vogler, Chris, 131
voluntary control, 23
volunteers, 143

Walgreen pharmacies, 142
Walt Disney World, 173
Webber, Melvin, 76
weddings, 156
Wendt, Thomas, 62, 83
wicked problems, 76–77
Wizarding World of Harry Potter, 128, 134
word-of-mouth recommendations, 145

YouTube, 7, 153

Zeithaml, Valarie, 138
Ziggy (cartoon), 113
               This file was downloaded from Z-Library project




Your gateway to knowledge and culture. Accessible for everyone.




z-library.sk          z-lib.gs            z-lib.fm         go-to-library.sk




                        Oﬃcial Telegram channel




                                 Z-Access




                   https://wikipedia.org/wiki/Z-Library
