                                   1




UNIVERSAL
DESIGN
17 Ways of Thinking and Teaching
Edited by Jon Christophersen
2


    © Husbanken 2002

    Det må ikke kopieres fra denne bok i strid med åndsverkloven
    og fotografiloven eller i strid med avtaler om kopiering inngått
    med KOPINOR, interesseorganisasjon for rettighetshavere til
    åndsverk.

    1. utgave 2002

    Opplag: 3000
    Trykk: Haslum Grafiske
    Bokbinderi: Bokbinderiet Johnsen as
    Grafisk produksjon: PrePress as
    Omslag layout: Geoffrey Kempton


    ISBN: 82-90122-05-5

    HB: 7.F.34 E
Contents                                                                                               3




           Contents
           Foreword . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    5
           Introduction by the Editor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .              7
           Author Biographies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           17



           Part 1. Europe
           1.1 Without Dreams, a New Reality Cannot Be Created.
               Tone Rønnevig, Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
           1.2 Cities, Buildings and Parks for Everyone, a Universal
               Design Compendium. Sigmund Asmervik, Norway . . 43
           1.3 Universal Design – an Interdisciplinary Challenge.
               Solveig Dale and Rigmor Leknes, Norway . . . . . . . . 59
           1.4 If Anything, Call It Ergonomics – in Search for a Word
               in a World Called Science. Marten Wijk, Holland . . 81
           1.5 Multi-Dimensional Evaluation as a Tool in Teaching
               Universal Design. Jim Sandhu, England . . . . . . . . . . 105
           1.6 Developments Towards Inclusive Design Teaching.
               Andrew Walker, England . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 127
           1.7 Architects of Tomorrow, Accessibility of the Future –
               Teaching Accessibility at the School of Architecture
               in Aarhus. Poul Østergaard, Denmark . . . . . . . . . . . . 149



           Part 2. North America
           2.1 Universal Designing. Edward Steinfeld and Beth
               Tauke, Buffalo, New York . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 165
           2.2 Universal Design: An Opportunity for Critical
               Discourse in Design Education. Polly Welch and
               Stanton Jones, Oregon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 191
           2.3 Infusing Universal Design Into the Curriculum.
               Wolfgang Preiser, Cincinnati, Ohio . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 217

           2.4 Distance Education in Universal Design. Molly
               Follette Story, North Carolina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 243
           2.5 A Universally Designed Universal Design Course.
               Laurie Ringaert, Manitoba, Canada . . . . . . . . . . . . . 269
4                                UNIVERSAL design




    Part 3. Asia and Australia
    3.1 Introducing Universal Design to a Colonial Context.
        Annette Pedersen and Christopher Crouch, Perth
        Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   289
    3.2 Universal Design Education and Development.
        Singanapalli Balaram, Ahmedabad, India . . . . . . . . .                        315
    3.3 Universal Design: Tertiary Education and Promotion
        in Asia. James Harrison and Kenneth Parker,
        Singapore . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   335
    3.4 Collaborative Design Studio for Universal Design
        in Chiba University. Kaname Yanagisawa,
        Chiba, Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      361
    3.5 Universal Design Competition for Students 2000
        Nagoya/Japan. Makato Yanagisawa, Nagoya,
        and Tadao Shimizu, Chiba, Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                   373
Foreword                                                           5




Foreword
During the last four years, The Norwegian State Housing Bank
has co-ordinated a systematic effort targeting Norwegian
schools and universities in the form of the "Universal design of
housing, buildings and the external environment" project.

Universal Design became a relevant theme in social develop-
ment during the course of the 1990s. Pioneers in the USA,
Europe and Japan accumulated information and developed vari-
ous methods of teaching. This collection of articles was
assembled as part of the Norwegian initiative to put Universal
Design onto the agenda.

In line with the Norwegian objective that everyone should be
given the opportunity to live in a good residential environment,
the Norwegian State Housing Bank believes it is important to
stimulate the development and dissemination of useful social
information, particularly among the future players in the hou-
sing and building sector. Architect Jon Christophersen,
Byggforsk (the Norwegian Building Research Institute) was
commissioned by the Norwegian State Housing Bank to gather
articles that would provide an insight into the principles of
Universal Design and how it is taught in various countries.

The articles will be of interest to everyone who works with phy-
sical design of the constructed environment, either within the
sector or in a related educational context.

We hope this collection of articles will provide inspiration to
those who are working to develop an inclusive society.



Oslo, April 2002



Geir Barvik
Managing director
6   UNIVERSAL design
Introduction
by the Editor   Introduction                                                         7




                Introduction
                by the Editor
                This volume has come about as an appendix to the main univer-
                sal design education project run by the Norwegian State
                Housing Bank. The project, which is presented in chapter 1.1,
                provides schools and universities with incentives and ideas to
                set up universal design courses. The aim is that by the end of
                the project period, universal design will be an integral part of
                the curriculum in most Norwegian schools and universities that
                educate architects, planners, designers, engineers, occupational
                therapists and craftsmen. The objective is to familiarize
                anybody involved with shaping the built environment with the
                concept of universal design.

                The starting point for this book is that universal design has
                become a worldwide movement, and, as universal design cour-
                ses can be found in universities all over the world, educators
                will be interested to see how universal design is being taught in
                various places. The intention is not to provide a comprehensive
                survey - that would require a substantial volume indeed - but to
                show and possibly document that the subject is being taught all
                over the world, and that there is both diversity and strong simi-
                larities in approaches to teaching, the content of the courses and
                the teaching methods. In order to limit the scope, the articles
                only deal with education at the university level. To some extent,
                the book complements Ostroff/Preiser's "Universal Design
                Handbook" and the "Strategies for Teaching Universal Design"
                by Polly Welch.

                Apart from South America and Africa, universities in most parts
                of the world are represented. It might be noted, however, that for
                various reasons it has not been possible to include articles from
                China, Korea or countries in the south or east of Europe. Again,
                the argument is that the intention is to provide examples of pre-
                sent teaching in the field rather than being comprehensive. On
                the other hand, the contributors include several of the domina-
                ting and best-known personalities in the field at present.

                Some attempts at covering a variety of academic fields have
                been made, but this has been less successful than the aim for
8                        UNIVERSAL design




    geographical dispersion. Thus, design and architecture domi-
    nate the book. Ideally, engineering subjects and planning should
    have played a larger part, but it proved impossible to find a suf-
    ficient number of available contributors who could present arti-
    cles on these subjects to achieve a balance with architecture and
    design. There is some logic to this: Having coined the universal
    design concept, designers have managed to achieve a certain
    amount of tradition, while architects, working from the basic
    notions of functionality, easily see how the concept is appli-
    cable and relevant to them.

    Respecting and allowing for the diversity involved we have
    given the authors free rein in the choice of scope, topics and
    presentations of their articles. Nevertheless, some features are
    so common as to seem central to the teaching of universal
    design. These are commented on in the following paragraphs.

    The Structure of this Book
    Structuring the present collection of articles is done in the sim-
    plest possible way: geographically, in three parts - Europe,
    North America and Asia/Australia. A more thematic structure
    would have become rather artificial, as so many of the articles
    cover a range of topics. However, there is some thematic struc-
    turing within each main section. Articles that focus on theoreti-
    cal subjects are placed first, followed by articles dealing with
    infusion into the curriculum, course structure and course con-
    tent, while descriptions of specific courses and projects conc-
    lude each section.

    Definitions
    Several of the contributors to this book were also present in the
    group that formulated the definition and the seven principles of
    universal design (appended to this introduction). Others have
    collaborated with or work together with these authors. Of the
    rest, it is safe to say that most have found that the principles of
    universal design provide a useful basis for their thinking about
    usability and functionality - although the actual terms used may
    vary somewhat, particularly outside the US (thus, both inclusive
    design - chapter 1.4 - and even accessibility is sometimes used
    with much the same connotations as Universal Design).
    Therefore, the definition, principles and guidelines listed in the
    appendix to this introduction serve as a basis for the design tea-
    ching that is the subject of this book.
Introduction
by the Editor   Introductionated                                                     9



                Promotion and motivation
                As a subject in schools of architecture and design, accessibility
                and, by extension, Universal Design, are often (as stated by
                James Harrison and Ken Parker in chapter 3.3 and other authors
                in this book) taught by default. Far less glamorous than
                Architectural Design, designing for a wide variety of users has
                to compete with the least interesting of the technical subjects -
                often alongside issues of legislation, or even as something
                which deserves little direct attention. (A good example of the
                latter point is cited by Andrew Walker in chapter 1.4). Thus,
                many teachers of universal design have had to put more effort
                into promoting the subject than those teaching the more traditi-
                onal aspects of architecture and design. Another example of
                achieving recognition is through an official competition as done
                in Japan (chapter 3.5) and through contact with industry (see
                chapter 2.4).

                Promotion and motivation of universal design thus become
                almost a subject in itself, which most of the authors in this book
                cover in some detail. In this context some issues have equal
                importance everywhere: those connected to demographics and
                individual rights. The rise in the proportion of elderly and dis-
                abled in the population is recognised as a problem everywhere,
                making the need for designs that accommodate a wide range of
                users imperative to avoid undue pressure on institutions and to
                reduce the need for personal assistance. At the same time the
                individual rights movement has made it politically impossible to
                disregard the needs of the disabled when designing the built
                environment. Extending the scope of universal design some-
                what, design for all would also include ethnic minorities - whe-
                ther indigenous peoples, immigrants or indeed women, as dealt
                with by Pedersen/Crouch (chapter 3.1), Harrison/Parker (chap-
                ter 3.3) and Steinfeld/Tauke (chapter 2.1). To some extent
                Balaram (chapter 3.2) also deals with this issue, seen from the
                point of view of a developing country.

                Achieving popularity with the students - once the basic problem
                of not being glamorous is overcome (on which Balaram, chap-
                ter 3.2, has some interesting views) - does not seem to be much
                of a problem. Indeed, a number of authors mention the popula-
                rity of the Universal Design course (see Preiser, chapter 2.4,
                Ringaert, chapter 2.6, Walker, chapter 1.4, Pedersen/Crouch,
                chapter 3.1 and the Japanese projects, chapters 3.4 and 3.5).
                Much of the popularity seems to be due to some fairly simple
10                        UNIVERSAL design




     factors such as the obvious relevance to the fundamental issues
     of functionality - i.e. the fitness for use by the human body - the
     political and demographic issues mentioned above, and the way
     the teaching connects with and is orientated towards the users.
     The latter factor of course has the effect of creating a valuable
     identification with the users.

     Infusing universal design into the
     curriculum
     This issue is closely connected to the former. Although
     Universal Design may be taught as a specialist subject, this has
     obvious shortcomings, unless the specialist teaching (as M.A.
     or Ph.D. dissertations) comes on top of more basic teaching
     throughout the course. The need for inclusion of universal
     design on all levels of the programme may well be obvious to
     the practitioners, but the ways and means of achieving it are by
     no means equally apparent. Andrew Walker, who perhaps has
     more years of practice than most other teachers in the field,
     relates his experiences and problems in chapter 1.4. Other
     approaches may be found in the articles by Preiser (chapter
     2.4), Welch/Jones (chapter 2.3) and Poul Østergaard (chapter
     1.5).

     With regard both to the problems of infusion and gaining accep-
     tance, the efforts by the Norwegian State Housing Bank stand
     apart from all others. The Housing Bank is of course not an
     educational establishment, nor does it have any formal connec-
     tion to the educational field. However, the Bank has for a num-
     ber of years been one of the most prominent promoters of
     accessibility in dwellings and dwelling areas in Scandinavia,
     and has therefore experienced both the frustration of disabled
     users and the insufficient level of expertise among architects
     and designers. The Bank therefore started a large-scale project
     aimed at all schools and universities that educate planners,
     designers and builders in Norway, with the aim that Universal
     Design should be taught in all places where those engaged in
     shaping the built environment are educated. As already men-
     tioned, the current book is a product of his project.

     Teaching methods
     Broadly speaking, the teaching methods can be subdivided into
     three main issues, theory, user involvement and evaluation.
Introduction
by the Editor   Introductionate                                                      11


                Theory
                Much of the basis for modern design might be criticised for
                basing its requirements on the ergonomics of the average able-
                bodied Caucasian male, or maybe even an idealised, "Greek
                god" version of him. As few people conform to this ideal, it is
                too narrow to fulfil the aims of good, functional design, and a
                different approach is needed. Thus, critical discourse becomes a
                worthwhile starting point for a theoretical and pedagogical
                approach to Universal Design. Both Steinfeld/Tauke (chapter
                2.1) and Welch/Jones (chapter 2.3) deal with these aspects in
                their articles. Balaram (chapter 3.2), on the other hand, con-
                trasts differences of ideals in Western culture with those found
                in some developing countries, while Wijk (chapter 1.2) attempts
                to find a broader scientific basis for design.

                User involvement – users as expert consultants
                User orientation is central to the teaching of Universal Design,
                and almost every article in this book describes ways and means
                of achieving it. There are at least five different approaches: One
                is to bring handicapped people in as lecturers, giving talks
                about their problems and ways to overcome them. Another is to
                involve users to evaluate or test existing and new designs pro-
                duced by the students (see for instance Balaram, chapter 3.2). A
                third way is to study user requirements through interviews, for
                instance as described by Molly Follete Story in chapter 2.5. A
                somewhat different approach, which seems particularly useful
                when designing for groups with varying types and degrees of
                handicaps, such as elderly people, is to study the users' way of
                life using a combination of interviews and observation. This
                was done by some teams in the Nagoya design competition
                (chapter 3.5) and is a vital part of the methods used by
                Pedersen/Crouch (chapter 3.1). The fifth and a commonly used
                method is usually referred to as simulation exercises. Although
                simulation may be carried out in a variety of ways, the object is
                always the same: to create awareness through experiencing han-
                dicaps for a limited period of time, and usually over a predeter-
                mined test course through buildings and outdoor areas. The
                method involves putting students in wheelchairs, using specta-
                cles that reduce normal eyesight etc (see Ringaert, chapter 2.6,
                Harrison/Parker, chapter 3.3 and Østergaard, chapter 1.5). It
                must be mentioned, however, that not all authors agree with the
                benefits of simulation. The argument against is chiefly that the
                awareness which is created is unreal; handicapped people have
                learnt to live and cope with their handicaps in ways which the
12                        UNIVERSAL design




     simulation exercise cannot hope to illustrate, and, for a handi-
     capped person, technical aids are necessities without which cer-
     tain functions cannot be performed, while a non-handicapped
     person may experience technical aids as an impediment.

     Evaluation
     Audits and evaluation are almost as important as user involve-
     ment. Thus, evaluation methodology becomes another central
     issue in the teaching of Universal Design. Both the articles by
     Jim Sandhu (chapter 1.3) and Wolfgang Preiser (chapter 2.4)
     deal extensively with evaluation methods, systems and tools. In
     addition, Molly Follete Story's article (chapter 2.5) links evalua-
     tion and assessment to the seven principles of Universal Design.

     Acknowledgements
     The editor wishes to thank all the contributors for their idealism
     and their ability to produce articles within a very short time
     frame. The editor is also particularly grateful to Elaine Ostroff
     and Dr. Satoshi Kose. Both gave invaluable help with sugges-
     ting and locating contributors to the book. A final note of
     thanks goes to the Norwegian State Housing Bank for putting
     up the funding and the means of publishing that have made this
     book possible.

     Jon Christophersen
     Norwegian Building Research Institute
    Appendix
by the Editor   Appendix. Definition, Principles and Guidelines Cre                   13


                Appendix
                Universal Design – Definition,
                Principles and Guidelines

                Adapted from Molly Follette Story, "The Principles of Universal
                Design", in Preiser/Ostroff (ed) Universal Design Handbook.

                Definition
                Universal Design is defined as the design of products and envi-
                ronments to be usable by all people, to the greatest extent pos-
                sible, without adaptation or specialized design.

                As developed by a group of American architects, product desig-
                ners, engineers and environmental design researchers, the defi-
                nition of Universal Design is accompanied by and linked to a
                set of seven principles. The intention is that the seven principles
                may be applied to evaluate existing designs, guide the design
                process and educate both designers and consumers about the
                characteristics of more usable products and environments. The
                group, which consisted of Bettye Rose Connell, Mike Jones,
                Ron Mace, Jim Mueller, Abir Mullick, Elaine Ostroff, Jon
                Sanford, Ed Steinfeld, Molly Story & Gregg Vanderheiden,
                have presented the principles in the following format:
                – name of the principle, intended to be a concise and easily
                   remembered statement of the key concept embodied in the
                   principle;
                – definition of the principle, a brief description of the princi-
                   ple's primary directive for design;
                – guidelines, a list of the key elements that should be present
                   in a design which adheres to the principle.

                It must be noted that all guidelines may not be relevant to all
                designs and that the Principles of Universal Design address only
                universally usable design; the practice of design involves more
                than consideration for usability. Designers must also incorporate
                other considerations such as economic, engineering, cultural,
                gender, and environmental concerns in their design processes.
                These Principles offer designers guidance to better integrate fea-
                tures that meet the needs of as many users as possible.
14                                                               UNIVERSAL design




     The seven principles
      Name                    Definition                          Guidelines
      1. Equitable Use        The design is useful and            1a. Provide the same means of use for all
                              marketable to people with               users: identical whenever possible, equiva-
                              diverse abilities.                      lent when not.
                                                                  1b. Avoid segregating or stigmatizing any users.
                                                                  1c. Make provisions for privacy, security, and
                                                                      safety equally available to all users.
                                                                  1d. Make the design appealing to all users.
                                                                  2. Flexibility in Use

      2. Flexibility in Use   The design accommodates a           2a. Provide choice in methods of use.
                              wide range of individual            2b. Accommodate right- or left-handed access
                              preferences and abilities.              and use.
                                                                  2c. Facilitate the user's accuracy and
                                                                      precision.
                                                                  2d. Provide adaptability to the user's pace.

      3. Simple and           Use of the design is easy to        3a. Eliminate unnecessary complexity.
         Intuitive Use        understand, regardless of the       3b. Be consistent with user expectations and
                              user's experience, know-                intuition.
                              ledge, language skills, or          3c. Accommodate a wide range of literacy
                              current concentration level.            and language skills.
                                                                  3d. Arrange information consistent with its
                                                                      importance.
                                                                  3e. Provide effective prompting and feedback
                                                                      during and after task completion.

      4. Perceptible          The design communicates             4b. Maximize "legibility" of essential infor-
         Information          necessary information effec-        mation.
                              tively to the user, regardless      4c. Differentiate elements in ways that can be
                              of ambient conditions or the        described (i.e., make it easy to give instructi-
                              user's sensory abilities.           ons or directions).
                              4a. Use different modes             4d. Provide compatibility with a variety of
                              (pictorial, verbal, tactile) for    techniques or devices used by people with
                              redundant presentation of           sensory limitations.
                              essential information.

      5. Tolerance for        The design minimizes                5a. Arrange elements to minimize hazards
         Error                hazards and adverse conse-              and errors: most used elements, most
                              quences of accidental or                accessible; hazardous elements eliminated,
                              unintended actions.                     isolated, or shielded.
                                                                  5b. Provide warnings of hazards and errors.
                                                                  5c. Provide fail safe features.
                                                                  5d. Discourage unconscious action in tasks
                                                                      that require vigilance.
                  Appendix
              by the Editor     Appendix. Definition, Principles and Guidelines                                15




Name                   Definition                              Guidelines
6. Low Physical        The design can be used effi-            6a. Allow user to maintain a neutral body
   Effort              ciently and comfortably and                 position.
                       with a minimum of fatigue.              6b. Use reasonable operating forces.
                                                               6c. Minimize repetitive actions.
                                                               6d. Minimize sustained physical effort.

7. Size and Space      Appropriate size and space is           7b. Make reach to all components comfor-
   for Approach and    provided for approach, reach,               table for any seated or standing user.
   Use                 manipulation and use regard-            7c. Accommodate variations in hand and grip
                       less of user's body size, post-             size.
                       ure, or mobility.                       7d. Provide adequate space for the use of
                       7a. Provide a clear line of                 assistive devices or personal assistance.
                       sight to important elements
                       for any seated or standing
                       user.
16   UNIVERSAL design
Author Biographies                                                       17




Author Biographies
Dr. Sigmund Asmervik is professor of landscape architecture at the
Department of Land Use and Landscape Planning at the Agricultural
University of Norway. He has recently completed a compendium on
Universal Design and currently leads the Agricultural University of
Norway's universal design development group. He holds a degree in
architecture and a Ph.D. in engineering from the Norwegian
University of Science and Technology, and was formerly the head of
the department of architecture and building technology at the
research institute SINTEF in Trondheim. Asmervik has published
widely on a number of subjects and is a highly respected lecturer.

Singanapalli Balaram has worked as creative writer, designer and
senior professor at the National Institute of Design, India, for over
three decades. He is presently the head of the Design Studies
Faculty as well as vice president of the Society of Industrial
Designers of India. He holds four patents for his innovations. His
design projects have received national and international awards and
he was conferred with honorary fellowship of the Society of
Industrial Designers of India. His latest publications include a book
"Thinking Design" and major chapters in Encyclopedia Britannica -
Asia. He serves on the advisory board of "Design Issues" Journal
(MIT Press, USA), on the board of governors of the Centre for
Environmental Planning and Technology as well as the National
Institute of Design. Design for special needs is his passion and he is
presently planning to start a Ph.D. level programme in this area.

Jon Christophersen is an architect at the Norwegian Building
Research Institute. He is the author of numerous publications on
housing quality, accessible housing and special needs housing. He
has also composed the Norwegian State Housing Bank's require-
ments for life span dwellings. Recent work includes recommenda-
tions for accessibility in the European Union's railways and
methods for assessing accessibility in existing built up settings,
including public transport. Christophersen is a contributor to the
Universal Design Handbook.

Dr. Christopher Crouch has published widely on the relationship of
modernity and post colonialism to visual culture. His book
Modernism in Art, Design and Architecture is a set text in university
courses in Britain and Australia. He is currently writing on a book
about modernity and the city. Dr Crouch coordinates theory at the
Western Australian School of Visual Arts, Edith Cowan University.
18                         UNIVERSAL design




     Solveig Dale is trained as an occupational therapist. Her background
     includes two years work with technical aids for disabled people and
     ten years work with housing for the municipality of Trondheim,
     where she is currently engaged with universal design of municipal
     buildings. For the past five years Solveig Dale has also had the
     responsibility for subjects concerning dwelling adaptations at the
     Department of Occupational Therapy at Sør-Trøndelag University
     College. Dale has written a thesis on provisions for the inclusion of
     disabled in the community. She holds an official recognition from
     the Norwegian society of occupational therapists as a specialist on
     community health, based on her Universal Design Work.

     Rigmor Leknes is an occupational therapist. Her background
     includes seven years of working with physically disabled adults at
     Munkvoll Rehabiliteringssenter and, since 1992 teaching on,
     amongst others rehabilitation, retrofitting of dwellings and univer-
     sal design at the Department of Occupational Therapy at Sør-
     Trøndelag University College. Here she also has been organising
     the one day, multi-disciplinary seminar described in this article.
     She holds a bachelor degree and is currently working on a thesis
     on accessibility, elderly people and activities outside the home.

     Stanton Jones is professor of landscape architecture at the
     University of Oregon. His work has focused on open space planning
     and design from both a site and a systemic perspective, concentrat-
     ing on public space in low-income communities and communities of
     colour as well as the interrelated issues of inclusivity, cultural di-
     versity, social justice, and environmental equity as they pertain to
     populations underserved by the public realm. He teaches design and
     planning studios, graduate seminars on public space, and courses in
     landscape technologies and construction. Recent professional pro-
     jects include a community revitalization and a community visioning
     process for cities in Oregon, and several design/build projects
     involving students, practitioners, and users.

     Dr. Annette Pedersen is a socio-legal scholar interested in social
     justice and pedagogic practices related to inclusive curricula. She
     has published in areas related to social justice, pedagogic practice,
     post-colonialism, art history and Australian/Irish socio-legal his-
     tory. She and Dr. Crouch have collaborated on a number of inclu-
     sive curriculum projects in Western Australian universities. Dr.
     Pedersen is currently working on a book focused on ethics and
     contemporary Australian culture.

     Laurie Ringaert, BSc., BMR-OT, M.Sc., has been involved with dis-
     ability and access issues for over 20 years. She is an occupational
     therapist and holds a Master of Science degree in Community
Author Biographies                                                       19


Health Sciences. She has worked as director of the Universal Design
Institute at the Faculty of Architecture, University of Manitoba,
Canada. She previously taught occupational therapy students. She
has served as principal investigator on several research projects and
has developed courses on universal design. Laurie provides consul-
tation to several building code, standards and guidelines committees
and publications. Laurie has served as a test site coordinator for the
World Health Organization's (WHO) testing of the International
Classification of Impairment Disability and Handicap and is a
member of the WHO Environmental Task Force. She has been
involved on disability community boards and is currently a founding
member and Chair of the Canadian Centre on Disability Studies
(CCDS). Laurie has provided universal design seminars in Canada
to Ukrainian and Russian delegates and has travelled to Russia and
Estonia to provide seminars and project development. Laurie is cur-
rently developing a universal design consulting business.

Tone Rønnevig is an advisor at the Norwegian State Housing Bank,
and leads the Bank's Universal Design education project. She is
trained as an occupational therapist. Having concentrated on access-
ibility in housing, her work includes project co-ordination and devel-
opment, studies and research, both for the public and the private
sectors. The former includes local authority as well as state bodies.

Jim Singh Sandhu has worked in the field for over thirty years in
twenty-five countries and has published 200 papers, reviews, book
chapters and books. His consultancy, teaching, and research work
has covered products, transport, telematics and environments. A
founder member of the European Institute for Design and
Disability and past president he has also been policy adviser to the
British Government and the European Commission. He is the
director of Inclusive Design Research Associates (INDRA).

Tadao Shimizu is a MFA from Cranbrock Academy of Art (USA)
and Dr. of Engineering from Tokyo University. He has worked as a
designer in both Japan and USA, and has also taught as an assistant
professor at University of Washington (USA) and Chiba University
(Japan). Mr. Shimizu is the recipient of more than 40 design awards.

Edward Steinfeld, D.Arch., is professor of architecture and adjunct
professor of Occupational Therapy at SUNY/Buffalo. He is the
director of the IDEA Center and the RERC on Universal Design at
Buffalo. He received two Progressive Architecture Awards for
Applied Research and a Research Recognition Award from the
National Endowment for the Arts. From 1974-1984 he was the
20                         UNIVERSAL design




     secretary of ANSI A117, the committee that develops the consensus
     standard used for accessible design throughout the U.S. and a mem-
     ber of the CABO/ANSI A117 Committee from 1995-1998. Dr.
     Steinfeld was one of the developers of the Principles of Universal
     Design. Recent activities include research on accessibility and uni-
     versal design in housing, usability of automobiles for older people,
     methods for measuring the usability of products and environments
     and the development of a prototype "Universal Bathroom." He is
     also currently an expert consultant to the New York City Housing
     Authority. He has experience as a practicing architect in housing,
     health care, retail stores and religious buildings.

     Molly Follette Story is a researcher and designer specializing in
     products for diverse populations, including individuals with disabil-
     ities and older adults. She has been on the staff of the Center for
     Universal Design since 1994. She coordinated the development of
     and helped author the Principles of Universal Design and has fre-
     quently written about and presented them to international audi-
     ences. Ms. Story has taught industrial design since 1984 at Georgia
     Institute of Technology and North Carolina State University.

     Beth Tauke, M.A., M.F.A. Ms. Tauke is an associate professor at
     the Department of Architecture at the SUNY/Buffalo. She directs
     the Educational Models Project for the RERC on Universal
     Design at Buffalo. This project is developing resources for univer-
     sal design educators and developing multidisciplinary programs
     on universal design education at SUNY/Buffalo. Her scholarly
     research combines the areas of visual communication, colour
     theory, visual/spatial perception/analysis, and design education.
     She has presented her work on design education and curriculum
     development at over thirty conferences since 1988, including eight
     National Conferences on the Beginning Student, three College Art
     Association Conferences, three Association of Collegiate Schools
     of Architecture Annual Meetings, four National Foundation for
     Art, Theory, and Education Conferences, three International
     Design Communication Conferences, and three Industrial Design
     Society of America Education Conferences.

     Andrew Walker is an architect by training. He was formerly the
     Head of Technical Studies and Director of the Environmental
     Access Programme at the Architectural Association School of
     Architecture (AA). He is a founder member and former Chair of
     the United Kingdom Institute for Inclusive Design (UKiiD).

     Polly Welch, an architect and professor at the University of Oregon,
     has been engaged in promoting inclusive design for twenty years
Author Biographies                                                           21


as a practicing architect and as a consultant to public and private
organizations on user accommodation. She has been instrumental
in developing accessibility regulations, served on the adjudication
board of a state access board, and has authored award-winning
guidelines on accessibility. As former deputy assistant secretary for
Public Housing in Massachusetts, she was responsible for the
siting and construction of housing for low-income families, people
with mental and physical disabilities, and older people. She is the
editor of Strategies for Teaching Universal Design, co-author with
Stanton Jones of Advances in Universal Design Education in the
United States, and speaks frequently on universal design and social
equity. Her teaching includes design studios and classes on the
social, political, and economic context of design.

Maarten Wijk is professor at the Department of Architecture at the
Delft University of Technology. His interests include ergonomics of the
built environment. He is senior manager at Deloitte & Touche ICS
consultants in the field of strategic facility and real estate management.

Kaname Yanagisawa is associate professor at the Faculty of
Engineering, Department of Design and Architecture, Chiba
University. He has a Ph.D. and a Master’s degree in Architecture
from the University of Tokyo. His thesis "Studies of the spatial
analysis from the viewpoint of children's behaviour setting"
received an award from the Architectural Institute of Japan, and he
has written several books and articles on the design and use of
school buildings, school furniture and the uses of classrooms.

Makoto Yanagisawa is Dr. of Engineering from Tokyo University. He
has worked as a professor at Nagoya University and Nagoya City
University since 1975. Much of his work has been committed to im-
proving and developing Hospital Planning. A thesis prize was awarded
by the Architectural Institute of Japan; some projects he has worked
on were awarded by Japan Institute of Healthcare Architecture.

Poul Østergaard was employed at the office of the architects Jørgen
Bo and Vilhelm Wohlert from 1958, working amongst other projects
on the design for the Louisiana Art Museum outside Copenhagen.
Since 1968, he has been a member of the teaching staff at the Aarhus
School of Architecture. He founded the school's department of indus-
trial design in 1983 and was the head of the department until 1993.
Since then, he has been engaged in a variety of research projects,
concerning people with special needs as well as giving numerous
lectures on accessibility both in Denmark and abroad. Poul
Østergaard has also been engaged in external projects on accessibil-
ity guidelines for government ministries and user organisations.
                        22




Photo: FotoKnutsen AS
         23




Part 1
Europe
2424   UNIVERSAL design   Part 1 Europe




                                          Photo: FotoKnutsen AS
     Tone Rønnevig
The Norwegian State   Without Dreams, a New Reality Cannot Be Created                     25
      Housing Bank




                      1.1 Without Dreams,
                      a New Reality Cannot
                      Be Created
                      Tone Rønnevig, advisor, The Norwegian State Housing Bank


                      This chapter describes a Norwegian pro-
                      ject organised by the Norwegian State
                      Housing Bank. The aim of the project is
                      to reinforce the integration of the
                      Universal Design concept in schools,
                      colleges and universities that educate
                      professionals who shape the man-made
                      environment. This includes architects,
                      planners, designers and engineers as well
                                                                     Tone Rønnevig.
                      as members of the building trades. The
                                                                     Coordinater of the
                      project started in 1997 and will close in
                                                                     project.
                      2002. This chapter describes the organi-
                      sation of the project, the aims and objec-
                      tives, methods and results as well as some of the ups and downs
                      experienced in the process. Thanks to highly skilled and hard-
                      working collaborators in the organisations for the disabled, in
                      research institutes and government ministries, we have been
                      able to provide the schools and universities with a framework
                      which could be developed further. We have been quite success-
                      ful, and we hope that our experiences may provide some inspi-
                      ration for others outside Norway. To document the project, two
                      booklets are currently being produced. One deals with motiva-
                      tion; the intention is to inspire schools and universities to get
                      involved in the subject. The other booklet presents school pro-
                      jects and results reached during the project period. Another
                      booklet, "Inspiration", which has already been produced, pre-
                      sents good Norwegian and European examples with comments
                      on possible improvements.
26                         UNIVERSAL design   Part 1 Europe




     Reasons for starting the project
     Substituting institutional care for care in the home has been one of
     the main priorities for the reforms that have taken place in
     Norway during the 1980s and 1990s. The ideological basis is that
     everyone shall be able to live and participate equally in society,
     thus securing basic human values and equal opportunities for eve-
     rybody. However, decisions made on this basis have and will cont-
     inue to have a number of consequences. One consequence is that
     new demands will be put on the design of products, dwellings,
     buildings and outdoor areas; the former values and priorities that
     made up the basis for the design of the existing man-made envi-
     ronment are somewhat different. Thus, attitudes have to change
     both among designers and in the building trades. In addition, the
     knowledge base among the professionals has to expand.

     The responsibility for the training of professionals and the deve-
     lopment of planning and practice has been and is still divided.
     Statutory requirements for accessibility are worded in such gene-
     ral terms that disregarding them has been easy for most of the
     actors in the field. Well-functioning, high-quality design solutions
     are not created as a matter of course.

     The organisations for the disabled have been playing very deman-
     ding roles in the process of changing requirements and attitudes.
     By tradition the organisation for the blind acted as spokesman for
     persons with visual impairments, whilst the Norwegian
     Association of the Disabled represented those with reduced mobi-
     lity. The result was often that solutions that worked well for one
     group were less than ideal for the other, and that information to
     designers and planners was inconsistent and conflicting. There
     was little co-operation towards a common goal.

     That was the starting point when the Norwegian State Housing
     Bank invited the organisations for the disabled to a meeting in the
     spring of 1997. The objective of the meeting was to discuss the
     possibilities for collaborating and forming a new strategy - the
     Housing Bank being the provider of grants for work related to
     housing for elderly and disabled people. Statutes, requirements,
     building trades and education were all seen as issues needing to be
     approached and influenced.

     Following a long process and a series of discussions, an agree-
     ment was reached that new modes of collaboration should be
     tested. It was also agreed that the effort should be directed towards
     Tone Rønnevig
The Norwegian State   Without Dreams, a New Reality Cannot Be Created                         27
      Housing Bank



                      education, aiming at integrating an understanding of different user
                      needs into the courses on offer. (Efforts towards the building
                      trades and statutory requirements are still continuing on a day-
                      to-day basis.)

                      Having agreed both to co-operate and to work towards the field of
                      education, the Norwegian Building Research Institute was asked
                      to produce an introductory project, describing the target areas in
                      the educational establishments, the existing knowledge base and
                      possible education methods for Norwegian schools and universi-
                      ties.

                      At the same time, visits were made to schools and government
                      departments to discuss possibilities and to create interest in such a
                      project. The reactions to these promotional efforts were generally
                      favourable, but also somewhat sceptical. The scepticism gave us
                      the courage to continue marketing the project and confirmed the
                      importance of what we were doing. The visits also provided us
                      with important information about the structure and composition
                      of the schools - their widely different decision processes, highly
                      individual working models and the varieties of pedagogical theo-
                      ries. We, with our basis in design and social sciences had to be
                      humble towards the world of teaching and adopt an attitude of
                      listening and learning.

                      Organisation
                      The group involved in the discussions included representatives
                      from several organisations for the disabled in Norway: The
                      Norwegian Society for the Blind, Norwegian Association of the
                      Disabled, Norwegian Federation of Organisations of Disabled
                      People, Norwegian Association for Persons with Developmental
                      Disabilities and the Norwegian Heart and Lung Association.
                      Additional participants were one person from the Norwegian
                      State Council on Disability and two researchers who had
                      worked for a number of years with questions regarding housing
                      for disabled people.




                      Our logo, showing a range of human diversity.
28                        UNIVERSAL design   Part 1 Europe




     A major problem at this stage was how to organise and finance
     the task. Our visits to the schools and our acquaintance with the
     educational system had uncovered a sector with severely limited
     financial resources. Any new activity would mean additional
     costs. We decided (1997) that the representatives involved up to
     then should establish themselves as a project group. The
     Housing Bank's role was clarified and defined as project co-
     ordinator. The various members of the project group were - in
     addition to serving as representatives for their organisations -
     given the task of leading a school working group. Six school
     working groups (one for each type of school), each consisting
     of three members, were established; we felt that three members
     were necessary in order to strengthen the groups and provide
     opportunities for discussion. The intention was that the school
     working groups should provide means of contact with the
     schools as well as initiate and follow-up activity, experiments
     and development. Given the mandate for the school working
     groups, their responsibilities were to develop plans for action
     and budget, and to follow up reporting and time scheduling.

     This way of organising the project proved to be successful. It
     has indeed been one of the strongest forces driving the project
     forward, and an advantage we did not realise that we had when
     the project started. The process involved was, however, both
     time-consuming and complicated. Few participants in the group
     were used to looking beyond the needs of one particular group
     and see the totality of many groups of users. Working on this
     project, having Universal Design as a unifying concept, has
     given the organisations involved a new approach which has
     been useful in other contexts (such as other parallel projects -
     particularly one run by the Ministry of the Environment).

     An advisory reference group was established in 1998, mainly to
     achieve a better link to the central government and to create
     better organisational ties (in addition to improving the chances
     of funding). This group had representatives from the Ministry
     of Education, Research and Church Affairs, the Ministry of
     Health and Social Affairs, the Ministry of Local Government
     and Regional Development, the Ministry of the Environment,
     the Forum for Co-operation between Organisations for the
     Disabled (SAFO), Norwegian Federation of Organisations of
     Disabled People and the Norwegian State Council on Disability
     (the government's agency). This group has contributed to put
     Universal Design on the agenda and has been supportive in the
     discussions on strategies and funding.
     Tone Rønnevig
The Norwegian State   Without Dreams, a New Reality Cannot Be Created                        29
      Housing Bank



                      Our ambitions
                      After the introductory phases, the project group agreed on the
                      following objectives:


                      1. The project shall promote changes which as far as possible
                         will ensure that products and the built environment will be
                         designed for all, as well as altering attitudes so that the idea
                         of integration becomes the basis for product development,
                         planning and building in the next century.
                      2. The intended results of the project are that
                         – planning for disabilities and knowledge about Universal
                           Design will be integrated into the courses offered by scho-
                           ols and universities, including relevant health education,
                           technological and design education in Norway (architects,
                           planning, industrial design, interior design, occupational
                           therapists, and builders).
                         – the schools and universities will be able to develop suffici-
                           ent know-how to carry out courses in Universal Design.
                         – subjects relevant to Universal Design will be included in
                           the curriculum of the schools and universities by the end of
                           2001, or that there is a plan for the inclusion of the subject.

                      In addition, we were resolved that experiments in teaching
                      Universal Design should be carried out in all the different types
                      of schools during 1999.

                      When the aims and objectives were defined (the dates were
                      revised while the project was running) and some of the funding
                      was in place, we invited the schools to a starting-up conference.
                      The project covered the participants' travelling costs.

                      Inspiration and starting-up conference
                      During the first phase of the project, two members of the pro-
                      ject group were present at a conference on Universal Design
                      education organised by the European Institute for Design and
                      Disability, EIDD, in Mainz, Germany. It attracted enthusiastic
                      and inspiring designers, and gave us the possibility of meeting
                      Elaine Ostroff, who informed us of the work that was going on
                      in the US. When we told her of our plans to invite Norwegian
                      schools to a conference, she offered to supply all the partici-
                      pants with a copy of the book "Teaching Universal Design"
                      (Welch 1995). She also invited us to the international confe-
                      rence Design for the 21th Century in New York in 1998.
30                        UNIVERSAL design   Part 1 Europe




     Our starting-up conference took place in November 1997. It
     had some 60 participants, representing the levels of education
     we had aimed for. The main theme of the conference was to
     present and discuss the Universal Design concept. To open the
     conference, we brought in Linda Sheridan from the School of
     Architecture at Liverpool University, who is an experienced lec-
     turer within the subject. She also presented ideas for the after-
     noon workshops. During the workshops, the school working
     group leaders discussed ideas for education projects, experi-
     ments and the will and possibilities for carrying them out.

     The conference found that all the schools and school types that
     were present had a positive interest in carrying the Universal
     Design concept further into their educational fields. The partici-
     pants agreed on a need for educating both the teachers and the
     students, as well as developing teaching materials and school
     projects. All received a copy of "Teaching Universal Design" - a
     summary of which we, at a later date, have published in
     Norwegian.

     Invitations to schools and universities
     The project group decided that, for the work to be effective, all
     types of schools that educate professionals within the fields of
     design, construction and production should be represented in
     the project. At the outset, all types of health education were also
     targeted. This was, however, narrowed down to occupational
     therapists, as these often play the part of user representatives in
     local authority building projects. In addition, these professio-
     nals were seen as an important resource regarding information
     about user needs - an aspect that is often remote and unfocused
     in the education of the other types of professionals.

     Norway is a small country in terms of inhabitants, only 4.5 mil-
     lion. The universities are located in the four main cities; poly-
     technics are situated in smaller and larger cities, and most
     municipalities have secondary schools.

     The schools and universities that were invited to take part in the
     project included:
     – The schools of architecture in Oslo, Bergen and Trondheim
     – Schools of planning in Ås, Oslo, Trondheim, Volda,
       Stavanger, Kjeller, Grimstad, Volda
     – Schools of engineering in Stavanger, Bergen, Narvik,
       Trondheim, Agder, Oslo
     – Industrial design schools in Oslo and Trondheim
     Tone Rønnevig
The Norwegian State   Without Dreams, a New Reality Cannot Be Created                          31
      Housing Bank



                      – Building trades programmes in Bergen, Trondheim,
                        Skedsmo, Kristiansand
                      – Schools of occupational therapy in Bergen, Tromsø,
                        Trondheim, Oslo

                      As there are a large number of schools of engineering and
                      secondary schools, only a limited number were invited.




                      The Vigeland sculpture park in Oslo: "Community?" - an example of
                      Universal Design as students at SHKS, Norway have understood the term.
32                         UNIVERSAL design   Part 1 Europe




     Structure and time schedule
     The project was evaluated in the spring of 2000. The findings
     were largely positive with regard to the results and the way the
     project had been carried out. In addition, the evaluation gave us
     an opportunity to see some side effects of the work. At the time
     of writing this chapter, we have accomplished a lot of hard
     work, but we hope that our conclusions will be useful in the
     time to come. The list below sums up the main stages.

     1. Preparatory phase (1997-98)
        Analysis of educational needs
        Project organisation
        Marketing and legitimising the project

     2. Practical work (1998-2000)
        Initiating introductory projects and development of educatio-
        nal experiments
        School projects and experiments
        Reports from school and experiments
        Development of teaching material
        Conclusions

     3. Conclusions (2000-2001)
        Summing up and production of documentation about the
        project Evaluation1

     Being too ambitious
     During 1998, the project group members spent a lot of time
     making contacts and learning about school structures and teaching
     methods. In our first plans - without pedagogic expertise in the
     project - we had designated 1999 as the year for teaching experi-
     ments and the year 2000 as the final year. At this time, the schools
     were supposed to have Universal Design worked into the curricu-
     lum. We realised, as the year 1998 was reached, that plans for an
     educational year are made one year ahead (a fairly obvious fact),
     and that it takes time to bring in new objectives. It also became
     clear that we, rather than the teachers, were the ones that knew
     about user needs. The process of creating a knowledge base and
     have it integrated into the school system would have to run in
     parallel if we were to meet the objectives we had laid down. We
     accepted that this was not possible in practice and decided to let
     the schools do their own timing regarding projects and experi-
     ments. Infusing Universal Design concepts demands not only

     1 The project was evaluated by Asplan Analyse in 2000.
     Tone Rønnevig
The Norwegian State   Without Dreams, a New Reality Cannot Be Created                           33
      Housing Bank



                      theoretical knowledge, but also changing attitudes and ways of
                      thinking. We also learnt that with regard to role models a number
                      of barriers had to be broken down. User models developed by
                      Neuffert (Bauentwicklungslehre) and le Corbusier (the Modulor)
                      had to be altered (and preferably discarded). Young people who
                      are developing are not only under pressure to think universally, but
                      also have to combat their own selfishness in addition to outmoded
                      ideas conveyed by some teachers. However, we kept in close con-
                      tact with the schools and tried to inspire them into action.

                      In 1998, funding was also high on the agenda. To succeed means
                      that experiments at the different schools had to be provided with
                      financial support. We had to convey the honourable aims and objec-
                      tives of the project wherever means could be made available. Thus
                      we were both proud and relieved when the project was listed as a
                      separate area of commitment in the central government's budget.

                      The Experiments
                      to develop and carry out education projects. We also gave
                      them the opportunity to start work on teaching materials.
                      During the introductory phase the working groups had stres-
                      sed that the Universal Design and user needs requirements had
                      to be compulsory subjects. If not our surroundings would
                      change very slowly indeed. The teachers we had contacted
                      worked accordingly and introduced both compulsory projects
                      and subjects for choice. In 2001 the development of projects
                      and teaching methods is still going on, and some research pro-
                      jects have been formulated. A list of projects is provided in
                      appendix 12. Other projects will be presented in the booklet
                      "Presentation", which the Housing Bank is publishing.

                      Follow-up Conference
                      In connection with a conference on aesthetics and functionality,
                      all the participants in the project were present at a one-day con-
                      ference in May 2000. The object of the conference was mutual
                      inspiration and exchange of ideas. During the plenary session
                      which started the day teachers and students presented school
                      projects, experiences and sketched the aims of the exercises. In
                      addition the leaders of the school working groups presented
                      their experiences. In the afternoon discussions of further deve-
                      lopments and ambitions were held in working groups, one
                      group for each type of school. The conference was successful in
                      several respects: The teachers found rewarding opportunities for

                      2 The summaries of the projects are based on Halvor Kr. Halvorsen 2000.
34                        UNIVERSAL design   Part 1 Europe




     exchanging views and experiences with other teachers, and tea-
     chers from different types of schools had a rare chance to get
     acquainted.

     What has been achieved?
     In relation to the aims of the project, we have:

     – partly achieved that planning for disabled people and know-
       ledge about Universal Design has been integrated into the
       curriculum at schools where architects, industrial designers,
       interior designers, occupational therapists and builders in
       Norway are educated.
     – achieved that the schools and universities are in a position to
       develop a knowledge base which will enable them to teach
       Universal Design as a subject. However, some schools prefer
       to use experts from the outside because they see a need for
       specialists on the subject and because this gives the course a
       higher status.
     – achieved that a course will be repeated several years in a row
       and that subjects relevant to Universal Design have either
       been worked into the curriculum or that there are plans to
       include them.

     We have seen presentations of student projects. These clearly
     show that the students have grasped the main points: They are
     open to a society which allows for human diversity, and under-
     stand that a product which can be used by a wide range of peo-
     ple has a potential for commercial success and may receive
     awards. In the words of one student: "The solution is intended
     to integrate use for all; if adaptations are needed, we have done
     a bad job."

     The project has also contributed to making the term Universal
     Design widely known in Norway. We see that attitudes are
     beginning to change; the political pressures to build and design
     for all are increasing.

     The Road Ahead
     The development projects at the schools and universities will be
     continued, and teaching material will be distributed and impro-
     ved. Research programs will be worked out and promoted. Our
     motivation and documentation booklets will be published
     during 2002, and we will present the projects and the partici-
     pants who have been involved in Norway.
     Tone Rønnevig
The Norwegian State   Without Dreams, a New Reality Cannot Be Created                    35
      Housing Bank



                      As the project is running to a close in Norway, the EU Council
                      has agreed on a resolution (Res AP (2001) 1), which calls for
                      Universal Design teaching in all schools that educate professio-
                      nals who shape the built environment in the member states.
                      Hopefully others will now pick up on our dream, grab the baton
                      and continue the work.

                      References
                      Welch, P. (ed.) Teaching Universal Design. Adaptive
                        Environments Center, Boston MA 1995.
                      Halvorsen, H. K. Evaluering av Husbankens utdanningspro-
                        sjekt universell utforming av bolig, bygning og utemiljø.
                        Asplan Analyse/Aplan VIAK. Sandvika. 2000.
36                        UNIVERSAL design   Part 1 Europe




     Participating Schools and School Projects
     Schools of Architecture
     The working group consisted of Edel
     Heggem, architect, Norwegian
     Association of the Disabled; Karin
     Høyland, architect, SINTEF; and Solveig
     Kornstad, architect, Norwegian State
     Housing Bank, Trondheim.
                                                     Edel Heggem. Leader
     Elective course – student competition
                                                  working group Schools
     A competition titled Dwellings for All
                                                  of Architechture.
     was organised in 1999, and the competition
     evaluation including a discussion of the term Universal Design.

     Teacher conference
     The working group has organised a seminar for teachers at the
     thee schools of architecture in Norway. Professor Marten Wijk
     from the Delft Instutute of Technology was invited as inspirator.
     He also took part in the seminar discussions. A framework for
     further development in the schools of architecture was drawn
     up as a conclusion of the seminar.

     Oslo School of Architecture
     Co-ordinator Margrethe Dobloug.
     1. Basic, first-year course module
        The module is a two-day course consisting of lectures and
        practical exercises in which the students make proposals
        based on user characteristics. The school wishes to include
        the course in the general curriculum.

     2. One-term design subject
        Universal Design of a primary school, to illustrate how archi-
        tectural solutions influence use and participation and to
        develop design methods which both recognise the impor-
        tance of time-/user aspects and take a dynamic approach to
        use and users. The overall object was to put architecture into
        a social perspective. Twenty-seven students took part.

     Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Trondheim,
     School of Architecture
     Co-ordinators Harald Høyem and Kjell-Håvard Bråten.
     1. Development and implementation of a course module in the
        basic architecture course
     Tone Rønnevig
The Norwegian State   Without Dreams, a New Reality Cannot Be Created                           37
      Housing Bank



                        The module was developed and put into practice in 1999.
                        The object was to make the students acquainted with scale
                        and dimensional requirements in relation to the environment
                        by testing full-scale models of rooms in dwellings (bed-
                        rooms, kitchen, entry, bathrooms etc). Seventy students took
                        part. The course has been made compulsory for second year
                        students from the year 2000.

                      2. Seminars (see also Schools for Occupational Therapy, Sør-
                         Trøndelag University College below)
                         The aim of the seminar was to inform the students about
                         Universal Design and to increase understanding regarding
                         requirements and solutions in different educational fields.
                         Seminars were held in 1999 and 2000, as collaborations be-
                         tween the school of architecture, the school of occupational
                         therapy, the school of engineering and the school of building
                         at Brundalen. (All schools in the county of Sør-Trøndelag.)
                         Some 150 participants were present. The seminar is compul-
                         sory for the students, and will be held every year.

                      3. Teaching material
                         Primary school teaching plan developed by Siv Bleikli and
                         Anne Torill Bleikli, on the premise that the Norwegian State
                         Housing Bank sees a need to increase the awareness of dwel-
                         ling quality at an early age. The existing structure in the pri-
                         mary schools makes it possible to include projects of this
                         type. As a result, a booklet presenting ideas was produced in
                         2001.

                      4. Solutions for accessibility in historical buildings
                         Prof. Eir Grytli and architecture student Cathrine Schøll
                         Heneide have produced a booklet showing how accessibility
                         has been achieved in a range of historical buildings. The boo-
                         klet will be used in the advanced
                         course at NTNU. It has since been
                         reworked and published a new edition
                         titled "Ingen hindring" (No Barriers).
                         The booklet is distributed by SINTEF,
                         Trondheim and Riksantikvaren in Oslo.

                      Schools of Planning
                      The working group consisted of Olav
                      Rand Bringa, civil engineer; Steen L.             Olav Bringa. Leader
                      Petterson, architect, Norwegian Heart             working group Schools
                      and Lung Association; Tone Manum,                 of Planning.
38                         UNIVERSAL design   Part 1 Europe




     Norwegian Association of the Disabled, Oslo County; and
     Gunnar Ridderstrøm, head of planning, Larvik Municipality.

     Kjeller University College
     Co-ordinators: Pål Jordanger and Kari Bjerke Karlsen.
     Kjeller developed a plan for the inclusion and integration of
     Universal Design into the various courses at the school, inclu-
     ding overall planning, health and social studies, and local envi-
     ronment for children and juveniles.

     Agricultural University of Norway
     1. Seminar and plan for action
        Prof. Sigmund Asmervik organised a seminar to inform the tea-
        chers at the school about Universal Design, and to start the
        work on a plan of action to integrate the subject into the courses
        at the school. The plan has been made, and Universal Design
        has been infused into the teaching. Each year about 110–120
        students are brought into contact with Universal Design.

     2. Teaching material
        A booklet showing examples and providing a background for
        group assignments, student projects and further studies into
        the subject has been produced by Prof. Sigmund Asmervik.
        (Asmervik 2000)

     Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Trondheim,
     School of Planning
     Teaching materials
     Sverre Nistov is developing reference materials for the students
     (experiments in the third year at the School of Architecture;
     Universal Design is by now integrated and compulsory for town
     and city planning students) and lectures, as well as an evalua-
     tion of the course. Further plans include teaching Universal
     Design for advanced studies in building technology.

     Master degree in planning
     This includes the development of a Universal Design module
     for a Master’s degree in social studies.

     Teaching materials and documentation for the education of
     planners
     Pål Jordanger is developing a compendium for health, social
     and environmental studies.
     Tone Rønnevig
The Norwegian State   Without Dreams, a New Reality Cannot Be Created                          39
      Housing Bank



                      Engineering Schools
                      The working group consisted of Jon
                      Christophersen and Karine Denizou,
                      architects, Norwegian Building Research
                      Institute; Stein Hustvedt, Bergen Muni-
                      cipality; and Morten Skjennem, architect,
                      Norwegian State Housing Bank, Oslo.
                                                                        Jon Christophersen.
                      Sør-Trøndelag University College                  Leader working group
                      Teachers and students at the school of            Engineering schools.
                      engineering participate in seminars orga-
                      nised by others.

                      Stavanger University College
                      Architect Jonas Espedal, who teaches at the college and has a
                      private practice in Stavanger, is developing a compendium and
                      sets of examples to be used for teaching engineering students.
                      Some experiments have been carried out at the school.

                      Secondary Schools
                      The working group consisted of Dagfrid
                      Hestenes, Norwegian Federation of
                      Organisations of Disabled People; Ole
                      Vefferstad, the Education Council for
                      Mining and Building; and Dagfinn Roy
                      Andersen, Kvadraturen school in
                      Kristiansand.
                                                                        Dagfrid Hestenes.
                      The working group has contacted publis-           Leader secondary
                      hers and authors of educational books to          Schools working
                      enquire about the possibilities of inclu-         group.
                      ding Universal Design in books that are
                      already in use. The group has also initiated work on a collection
                      of exercises for use in social studies and in the education of
                      builders.

                      Dagfinn Roy Andersen has written a booklet titled "Making
                      Way for All". The booklet introduces and discusses the
                      Universal Design concept, and describes training exercises
                      designed for secondary school pupils It has been distributed to
                      all the schools that train professionals for the building trades in
                      the country.
40                          UNIVERSAL design   Part 1 Europe




     Interior Design Schools and
     Industrial Design Schools
     The working group consisted of Ellen
     Jyhne, Norwegian Society for the Blind;
     Karen Karen Christie Bjønness, interior
     designer; and Sidsel Bjørneby, Human
     Factors Solutions Ltd.
                                           Ellen Jyhne. Leader Interior Design
     Oslo School of Architecture,
                                         Schools / Industrial Design Schools
     Institute for Industrial Design
                                                              working group.
     Co-ordinators Tom Vavik and Hilde Angelfoss.
     1. Teaching Experiments
        The co-ordinators worked towards developing a knowledge
        base at the school through educational experiments. A fur-
        ther goal was to have Universal Design fitted into the curri-
        culum. Some 15 students took part, and Universal Design is
        now being included at several levels in the programme.
     2. Revised Version of the textbook Human Aspects of Design - an
        introduction to ergonomics. The authors, Tom Vavik and Trond
        Are Ørritsland, have completed a revised version of the book.

     Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Trondheim,
     Faculty of Product Design
     Developments in the teaching of Universal Design which have
     taken place as a consequence of the Housing Bank education
     project include a contribution to Tom Vavik's textbook (above), a
     survey of and an article about the level of competence as regards
     Universal Design among Norwegian industrial designers (sum-
     mer 2000), the introduction of Universal Design in the teaching
     of ergonomics, industrial design and product design at the
     Norwegian University of Science and Technology. Universal
     Design was first introduced as a specialist subject (1999) but has
     later become an integrated part of the teaching (2000).

     The National College of Art and Design (NCAD)
     The professors Anne Alnæs and Terje Hope have developed,
     carried out and evaluated a course in Universal Design. The
     experiment was divided into three parts: "a candidate examina-
     tion" in the spring of 1999, a second and third year course in
     the autumn of 1999 and another course as an introduction to a
     study trip for third-year students. A total of eight teachers and
     36 students took part. In 2000 and 2001, the college has also
     organised projects in which Universal Design has been integra-
     ted into large-scale designs of schools and school playgrounds.
     One-day multi disciplinary seminar for students.
     Tone Rønnevig
The Norwegian State   Without Dreams, a New Reality Cannot Be Created                             41
      Housing Bank



                      Schools of Occupational Therapy
                      The working group consisted of Guri
                      Henriksen, Norwegian Association of the
                      Disabled; Bente Osnes, Norwegian State
                      Housing Bank, Oslo; Inger Hafsten, the
                      City of Oslo, and Randi Røed-Andersen,
                      DELTA-centre. The working group has
                      organised a seminar about the effects of
                      light. Participants were students of inte-
                                                                 Guri Henriksen. Leader
                      rior design, occupational therapists and
                                                                 Schools of Occupational
                      electrical engineering.
                                                                        Theraphy working group.

                      Sør-Trøndelag University College
                      1. One-day, multi-disciplinary seminar for students (see also
                         Schools of architecture above). The seminar was organised in
                         collaboration with the Norwegian University of Science and
                         Technology, the school of engineering at Sør-Trøndelag
                         University College and Brundalen school for builders. The
                         aim of the seminar was to inform the students about
                         Universal Design and to increase understanding regarding
                         requirements and solutions in different educational fields.
                         Seminars were held in 1999 and 2000. Some 150 participants
                         were present. The seminar is compulsory for the students,
                         and will be held every year. Universal Design courses have
                         also been organised in 2001 and 2002.
                      2. Collaborative Universal Design Project
                         Rigmor Leknes from the Occupational Therapy School and
                         Embret Sandbakken from the School of Engineering organi-
                         sed a project where students from the two schools worked
                         together on concrete proposals, using Universal Design prin-
                         ciples for the refurbishment of a building in Trondheim.

                      Schools of occupational therapy in Trondheim, Bergen, Oslo
                      and Tromsø
                      Ideas for teaching Universal Design. The four schools are collabo-
                      rating with the Norwegian Association of the Disabled to create a
                      reference work intended to increase the knowledge base, give con-
                      tent to the education structure and to provide a tool for the teachers.

                      Teaching material
                      The working group has produced a set of three loose-leaf fol-
                      ders. The first folder in the set goes through the principles of
                      Universal Design. The second concerns user adaptations, whilst
                      the third, which targets the teachers, contains various teaching
                      materials such as sheets for overhead projectors etc.
       Sigmund Asmervik
4242              UNIVERSAL design   Part 1 Europe
  42              UNIVERSAL design   Part 1 Europe




                                                     Photo: FotoKnutsen AS
Sigmund Asmervik. Agricultural   Cities, Buildings and Parks for Everyone, a Universal Design Compendium   43
    University of Norway (NLH)




                                 1.2 Cities, Buildings
                                 and Parks for Everyone,
                                 a Universal Design
                                 Compendium
                                 Professor Sigmund Asmervik, Department of Land Use and
                                 Landscape Planning, Agricultural University of Norway (NLH).


                                 Introduction
                                 When I first heard the term Universal Design in the summer of
                                 1998, in connection with an invitation to join a conference in
                                 the USA, I thought, as many others surely would, that this soun-
                                 ded very much like old content in a new package. However,
                                 after gaining more insight into the concept I realized that much
                                 more was involved than I had originally thought, as it was more
                                 about making all of society available and accessible to every-
                                 one, regardless of functional ability.

                                 Financing from the Norwegian State Housing Bank (as part of
                                 the Norwegian State Housing Bank project described in chapter
                                 1.1) has made it possible to write a compendium to be used in
                                 the teaching of students of architecture, landscape architecture
                                 and planning. The various school projects under the Housing
                                 Bank project at many institutions of learning in Norway have
                                 provided inspiration for this work, and study trips to other lo-
                                 cations in the Nordic countries, the USA and Barcelona in
                                 Spain have provided me with good examples upon which much
                                 of this publication is based.

                                 How to use the book
                                 The main aim of this book is to give the concept of universal
                                 design meaning to students in the fields of planning, architecture
                                 and landscape architecture so that as professionals they will find
                                 it an exciting and challenging part of their fields of work.

                                 Two aspects of the concept of universal design deserve special
                                 attention. One is the principle that we should plan and design for
                                 everyone without making special solutions for particular groups
               Sigmund Asmervik
44                        UNIVERSAL design   Part 1 Europe




     of the population due to age or functionality considerations.
     Universal design should help to remove or at least move away
     from the «we and you», «us and them» approach. The second
     aspect is that by working with universal design, the students are
     forced to devote attention to the needs and requirements of vari-
     ous groups. Industrial designers are already quite familiar with
     this way of thinking, as they are dependent on a market that is
     willing to buy a product at a certain price. Architects and land-
     scape architects have a strong tradition based on the idea that
     the individual’s «signed work» is the real objective of their
     activity, and this attitude often relegates awareness of the needs
     of various users to the sidelines in the learning processes.

     When we pay greater attention to these two aspects, we will need
     to cooperate with other professions, such as occupational thera-
     pists, social workers, educators, janitors and cleaning staff. To
     arouse the necessary curiosity in our students, the book presents
     some examples that are of special interest to universal design:

     – Barcelona has been chosen as an example of a city where
       truly systematic efforts are being applied to facilitate use of
       the city for everyone. Barcelona has been and will continue
       to be a magnet for students of planning and design, and will,
       for this and a number of other reasons be an appropriate goal
       for study trips.
     – The small city of Røros in Norway has been chosen because
       of its historic importance. Here, the need to protect historical
       monuments is a major concern, and the need to facilitate uni-
       versal design is particularly challenging. At Røros a com-
       prehensive registration of physical access to buildings with
       high visitor frequencies has been undertaken, yielding a good
       basis for student assignments. Moreover, we show a number
       of good solutions from other locations.
     – The University Centre at Dragvoll in Trondheim, Norway,
       was planned in the 1970s. The concept on which this facility
       is built in many ways lends itself well to universal design. At
       the Norwegian University of Science and Technology
       (NTNU) in Trondheim, planners have been very aware of the
       need to improve access for everyone.
     – Sommerfrydhagen, (the Summer Park) at Tøyen in Oslo,
       Norway, is a good example of a park that has been planned
       and designed for various groups of the population. Using
       simple techniques, landscape architects have created a model
       facility, paying special attention to the needs of functionally
       challenged children.
Sigmund Asmervik. Agricultural   Cities, Buildings and Parks for Everyone, a Universal Design Compendium   45
    University of Norway (NLH)



                                 – Sinnenas Trädgård (literally: garden of the mind) in the
                                   Sabbatsberg area of Stockholm, Sweden, is an exciting faci-
                                   lity that has been designed especially for the elderly who are
                                   suffering from dementia, but which has become a highly
                                   popular area for everyone, residents, employees and next of
                                   kin
                                 – Buildings designed by some of the most famous architects of
                                   the 20th century, such as Frank Lloyd Wright, Mies van der
                                   Rohe, Le Corbusier and Alvar Aalto, are also included, with
                                   comments in terms of universal design. These examples
                                   prove that for quite some time architects have looked upon
                                   the ramp as an architectural element, literally creating a
                                   sliding transition from outside to inside. They have also
                                   designed such details as door handles suitable for persons of
                                   various heights.

                                 Examples from Dragvoll in Trondheim and Sabbatsberg in
                                 Stockholm are presented below.


                                 Background for the concept universal
                                 design
                                 The universal design concept is American, and this country led
                                 the way in the 1990s with its intense efforts to facilitate society
                                 for everyone. The concept simply means an attitude or way of
                                 considering things, where surroundings, buildings and products
                                 are planned and designed so they can be used by everyone to
                                 the greatest extent possible. In the US there has been a fairly
                                 heated debate about this concept and its consequences. The fact
                                 that the concept can be understood in a number of ways is
                                 something that in itself fuels the debate. One interpretation is
                                 that; «It could also happen to me», i.e. that I could become
                                 functionally challenged, and that this is not only something that
                                 happens to others. Another stance is that this means nothing
                                 more than what good design and planning has always been
                                 about. Needless to say, the debate also focuses on how the
                                 concept was first arrived at and who was responsible for this.

                                 In 1977 the architect Michael Bednar pointed out that many
                                 people were surprised when they saw how the functionality of
                                 physically challenged persons increased dramatically when
                                 physical barriers were removed. This gave him the idea of
                                 launching a more comprehensive and general concept that
                                 included the needs of everyone. In the US, the concept «acces-
               Sigmund Asmervik
46                        UNIVERSAL design   Part 1 Europe




     sible design» was used a great deal early in the 1980s. However,
     as the concept appears to have taken on the meaning of acces-
     sible and accessibility particularly for persons with miscellane-
     ous handicaps, it has lost its meaning of accessibility for
     everyone.

     An accessible building was generally perceived as a building
     that could be entered by a person in a wheelchair, but exactly
     where the entrance was placed in relation to available public
     transport was not deemed to be part of the accessibility issue.
     Accessibility and participation are included in the universal
     design concept in a very wide sense. Another important point of
     universal design was that this would be a general condition
     incorporated in planning and design, and hence also cost-
     effective.

     The concept of universal design stemmed from two separate but
     related movements, one focusing on removing the they and us
     attitude, an approach that marginalized persons with functional
     disabilities, and the other focusing on a «democratisation» of
     the definition of good design with users in mind.

     In the 1960s, the focus on giving the functionally challenged,
     primarily mobility-challenged persons, better accessibility
     resulted in «solutions for the handicapped» with ramps, special
     lifts, bigger toilets and the international symbol featuring a
     wheelchair user. These measures have brought about substantial
     improvements for many mobility-challenged persons, but have
     also contributed to the stigmatization of this group of the popu-
     lation in a frequently negative way. The concept of universal
     design was also introduced to change attitudes that the physical
     accessibility concept could not satisfy.

     Planners, architects and designers comprise a group of profes-
     sionals that basically has users as the basis for their work.
     Architects have been especially reputed to have great interest in
     their personal work of art to the point of trivializing the needs
     of users. We find innumerable examples of buildings that gene-
     rally look very good in trendy periodicals but do not function
     well in everyday use. There is little comfort in professing belief
     in functionalistic architecture if the building does not function
     for various user groups. Designers have in many ways enjoyed a
     different relationship to users, as they have had to pay attention
     to the demands of mass production market dependency.
Sigmund Asmervik. Agricultural   Cities, Buildings and Parks for Everyone, a Universal Design Compendium   47
    University of Norway (NLH)



                                 A group of designers and architects in the 1960s drew attention
                                 to ergonomics and studied general human body functions, quite
                                 often based on average male bodies. This harks back to Le
                                 Corbusier’s Modulor from the end of the 1940s, a slightly dif-
                                 ferent kind of universal design. User-interested architects and
                                 designers have also had a tendency to consider special popu-
                                 lation groups, such as children and the elderly. Special design
                                 has often led to separation instead of integration.

                                 The idea of standardization has also generally led to solutions
                                 that are poorly adapted to various types of functional disabili-
                                 ties. The trend has been a general minimum standard, which in
                                 turn has led to solutions that are not viable for everyone.

                                 In 1990, the rights of Americans with functional disabilities were
                                 guaranteed in the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). This
                                 has greatly impacted the implementation of the philosophy of the
                                 concept of universal design. The discussion has now reached far
                                 beyond city ordinances and zoning bylaws on building design;
                                 attention has now been focused on the basic civil right to partici-
                                 pate in community life in general. By connecting the intention of
                                 this act to the American constitution’s pledge of equal rights, the
                                 focus has shifted from pragmatic discussions on where to place
                                 the wheelchair lift, to consideration of who are the users of the
                                 physical environment, buildings, parks and facilities, and what
                                 needs they have to orient themselves, move around and do what
                                 they want to do. One of the reasons why this epochal act from
                                 1990 has had such an effect is that it authorizes penalties for non-
                                 compliance in the form of fines and other injunctions.

                                 It may also be worth noting that the act was not written and
                                 promoted by radical associations and groups of people with
                                 functional disabilities, but rather proposed by the Reagan
                                 administration and adopted by Congress in the incumbency
                                 period of George Bush, conservative Republicans both. This
                                 demonstrates the relationship of the Act to one of the most
                                 typical of all American tenets, i.e. guaranteeing the civil rights
                                 of each and every citizen of the United States of America.

                                 Universal design is also very much about designing for the
                                 entire course of life. We all need accessible areas, buildings and
                                 various facilities not only when we are children, but also as
                                 adults and when we grow old. The very topical issue of the
                                 general greying of the population will probably be a good ally
                                 of proponents of universal design.
               Sigmund Asmervik
48                        UNIVERSAL design   Part 1 Europe




     If the concept of accessibility has largely been abandoned in the
     US today, it continues to be frequently used in Norway. A case
     in point is the circular T-5/99 B issued by three Ministries in
     1999 called Tilgjenglighet for alle (Accessibility for Everyone).

     Examples of general universal design
     assignments
     How big and how small is the human body?
     Does everybody have the same proportions? Measure each
     other’s full length; arms, legs, height to the hips and knees.
     What about the proportions of children and young persons?
     Compare the measurements with those of Le Corbusier as they
     are expressed in his Modulor.

     How many people are actually functionally
     challenged?
     Discuss in groups of four to six persons and determine whether
     you have neighbours, family or friends who are functionally chal-
     lenged, have visual or hearing impairments or who have allergies.
     Try to determine the proportion of the population that in the course
     of life will have one form of functional disability or another.

     Why is access to towns and buildings so difficult?
     Try to determine why so many buildings and types of transport
     are so poorly accessible. Contact the local building authorities,
     janitors and maintenance managers of various organizations.
     Local associations for the physically challenged may be good
     informants. Propose ways of enhancing accessibility.

     The universality of functionalism
     We quite automatically connect the concept of functionality to
     the approach within architecture and urban planning called
     functionalism. This philosophy generally emerged as an aesthe-
     tic project dominated by a relatively small group of architects
     and artists during the two or three first decades of the twentieth
     century.

     The establishment of the Bauhaus headed by German architect
     Walter Gropius, initially in Weimar in 1919 and later in Dessau
     in 1924, occupies a central place in the development of what I
     would call the aesthetics of functionalism. Such a dominant
     figure as the architect Mies van der Rohe also had links to
     Bauhaus. Artists that spring to mind include Wassili Kadinskij
     and Paul Klee.
Sigmund Asmervik. Agricultural   Cities, Buildings and Parks for Everyone, a Universal Design Compendium   49
    University of Norway (NLH)



                                 One of the most catchy slogans of the functionalists was Form
                                 Follows Function. However, this was a very mechanical and
                                 biological understanding of function. The car, the aeroplane and
                                 not least the Ocean Liner were models of the living machines of
                                 the 1920s and 1930s. The liberated individual was considered a
                                 biological phenomenon. Light, air and green areas were more
                                 than linguistic metaphors.

                                 Le Corbusier’s philosophy and proposal for «Universal Design»
                                 was Le Modulor, which he patented in 1947. This «modulor»
                                 was based on universal design in the sense that there are univer-
                                 sal measurements that are adapted to the human body in a
                                 general sense, and specifically a male body of 183 cm.

                                 Functionalism as we know it from the 1930s completely lacked
                                 social aspects, even if some of the neo-positivists in Vienna
                                 dreamed of replacing ethics with science. Generally the
                                 functionality of aestheticism developed from an aesthetically
                                 dominated point of departure into a virtual «scientification»
                                 from the middle 1930s and up towards 1960, where mass
                                 production and the forces of capital became the characteristics
                                 of later functionalism.

                                 Illustrations from Norwegian research on housing and buildings
                                 from the 1950s clearly demonstrate how human philosophy and
                                 gender roles are based on the objectification of humans as a
                                 physical and biological phenomena.

                                 If we consider in more detail some of the important works of
                                 the most famous architects from the 20th century we can easily
                                 demonstrate that accessibility in the sense we are now using the
                                 term was virtually unknown. Nonetheless, we can see that in a
                                 number of famous buildings the ramp has been used as a central
                                 architectonic element.

                                 Le Corbusier
                                 If we start with le Corbusier, we see that ramps have been used
                                 with great care in one of his most famous villas, Villa Savoye in
                                 Poissy, from 1928–31. Le Corbusier has also allowed ramps to
                                 be a central architectonic element in a number of other buil-
                                 dings, often large and complex ones.

                                 Frank Lloyd Wright
                                 The famous Guggenheim Museum from 1959 in New York by
                                 Frank Lloyd Wright is completely designed around the spiral-
               Sigmund Asmervik
50                        UNIVERSAL design   Part 1 Europe




     ling inner ramp. The ramp inclination is so slight that the walls
     along it are used to exhibit pictures.

     Mies van der Rohe
     Mies van der Rohe’s Barcelona pavilion from 1929 is an inter-
     esting example in this context. The generally flat floor without
     differences in levels expresses some of the main points of the
     pavilion and the new architecture, i.e. the fluent transition be-
     tween inside and outside, where persons may move easily and
     effortlessly. This floor level could quite simply have been made
     easily accessible with a slightly inclined ramp, as the differen-
     ces in levels are quite modest.

     Alvar Aalto
     Alvar Aalto is famous for his exquisite use of materials and the
     level of detailing in his buildings. Even though he did not work
     with the universal design concept, we see a number of examples
     in his work of his great concern for the users of buildings,
     whether this concerns illumination or cleaning. A special design
     element is his door handles at various heights for persons of
     various ages and heights.

     Assignments concerning famous
     architecture
     Are famous houses from the history of architecture
     easily accessible?
     Find famous buildings and facilities in modern architectural
     history from around 1920 and later. Study their accessibility by
     examining blueprints and photos. The best way of becoming
     familiar with a building is to build a model of it.

     Do architectural competitions consider accessibility?
     Architectural competitions determine trends. Review a number of
     such competitions, and study whether the idea that buildings and
     facilities should be accessible to everybody has been considered.

     What do famous architects and landscape architects
     believe?
     Contact famous architects and landscape architects and inter-
     view them for their response to the idea that buildings should
     be accessible to everybody. Try to determine what they feel is
     the most important reason to explain why this principle has not
     been carried out more than it has. Is it due to attitudes, finances
     or aesthetic considerations?
Sigmund Asmervik. Agricultural   Cities, Buildings and Parks for Everyone, a Universal Design Compendium   51
    University of Norway (NLH)



                                 The house for everyone
                                 The university centre at Dragvoll
                                 The university centre at Dragvoll in Trondheim is a separate
                                 part of the Norwegian University of Technology and Science,
                                 NTNU. As a special building facility it has received great atten-
                                 tion and has received a number of awards for its architecture.

                                 The architecture competition in 1971 which started the project
                                 was won by Henning Larsen’s Architect Office in Copenhagen.
                                 The winning design was based on Oxford, England, because
                                 this has approximately the same area as the competition pro-
                                 spectus indicated, as much as 500,000 m_ for around 25,000
                                 students. Today’s facility is around one tenth of this.

                                 Larsen wanted to build a dense city in a farming landscape 3–4
                                 km from downtown Trondheim. The project was based on a
                                 block structure of approximately 100 x 100 m. The most special
                                 aspect of the proposal was that it was based on glass-covered
                                 streets, a generally untried concept at this time in the 1970s (see
                                 fig. 1). Later glass-covered streets and urban spaces have grown
                                 quite commonplace in Norway and other parts of the world. The
                                 first section was taken into use in the autumn of 1978, the
                                 second section in the autumn of 1993, and a small section 3 in
                                 the autumn of 2000. Today there are more than 2,000 students
                                 at Dragvoll and the gross area is close to 60,000 m2.




                                 Fig 1. Glazed “street” at Dragvoll University Centre.
               Sigmund Asmervik
52                        UNIVERSAL design   Part 1 Europe




     The covered glass streets have especially attracted a great
     deal of attention, and been the object of discussions, studies
     and research. The original main argument for this solution was
     its financial benefits compared to traditional streets, bearing in
     mind the clearing of snow and regular maintenance. It has later
     been decided that this type of design reduces energy consump-
     tion for heating and has the added advantage of creating natural
     meeting-places.

     It has later been demonstrated that the main concept for this
     facility is favourable for implementing the idea that the building
     and facilities should be accessible for everyone. A number of
     lifts have been centrally placed in the streets and the facility
     provides a very sound basis for implementing the seven prin-
     ciples for universal design.

     In relation to the principle of equal opportunities for use and
     flexibility, we may state that this university centre is well desig-
     ned. We notice this already when we reach the entrance doors,
     where a light push on an automatic door opener gives easy
     entrance. With no need for long detours to reach the destination
     and with clear signs, the principle of simple and intuitive use
     and easily comprehensible information has been well handled.
     An example of the principle of tolerance of errors and design to
     alleviate the risk of accidents and injuries is the railing found by
     some stairs to prevent people with vision impairment and others
     from bumping their heads. The principle of good sizes and
     space for access and use is enhanced by the wide streets. A
     curiosity is the handicap marking on a computer terminal at a
     height adapted to wheelchair users. This sign should really be
     unnecessary here!

     However, even this facility features a number of details that are
     unsatisfactory when we consider the intention of ensuring
     accessibility for everyone. Measures that have been carried out
     to render the university centre even more accessible are listed
     below:

     Measures for enhanced accessibility
     To offer wheelchair users the opportunity to enter the building
     on their own and to be integrated instead of being sitting exhi-
     bits at a show, automatic entrance doors were installed in
     entrances adjacent to the parking area for the physically chall-
     enged. Moreover, new door opening buttons and new display
     panels were installed by the lifts inside the buildings to enable
Sigmund Asmervik. Agricultural   Cities, Buildings and Parks for Everyone, a Universal Design Compendium   53
    University of Norway (NLH)



                                 wheelchair users to use the facilities on their own. Not all the
                                 lifts are accessible, but wheelchair users have access to all
                                 areas, even though in some locations they must choose one of
                                 the two lifts. Study desks have been reserved close to these lifts.

                                 All regular exit doors have been replaced with sliding doors
                                 with infrared sensors. This eases accessibility for all users. The
                                 information desk has been furnished with hatches at a height
                                 suitable for wheelchair users and with bells for summoning
                                 assistance.

                                 All auditoriums are being adapted for wheelchair users. Some
                                 auditoriums had a high brick wall which wheelchairs users were
                                 unable to see over, and this has now been replaced by tables so
                                 that wheelchairs users are able to sit with the others. All the
                                 auditoriums feature adjustable tables intended for wheelchair
                                 users.

                                 All stairs in the walkways were marked so they would be visible
                                 for those with vision impairment. Moreover, induction loops
                                 have been installed in all the auditoriums. Maps on the outside
                                 of auditoriums indicate the parts of the rooms that have good
                                 coverage.

                                 All staircases in communal areas were marked with white tiles
                                 on vertical and horizontal planes. It was too expensive to
                                 replace full tiles with split tiles on all the stair edges. Eventually
                                 all the areas will be marked in contrasting colours.

                                 Outside markings and opening buttons have been placed on an
                                 attractive standard column that can be used by anyone.

                                 Assignments on the building for
                                 everyone
                                 How can we study whether a building is accessible
                                 for everyone?
                                 Undertake a specific and detailed study of accessibility for
                                 persons with mobility, vision and hearing impairments and/or
                                 allergies in a building used by a large number of people.
                                 Interview the maintenance department and the staff working
                                 with health, environment and safety issues. Propose improve-
                                 ments and draw up a detailed plan for improvement works.
               Sigmund Asmervik
54                        UNIVERSAL design   Part 1 Europe




     How can we plan to improve accessibility?
     In an exercise assume that a building, park or facility must be
     accessible for everyone. Consider how you can exploit ramps
     and lifts, colour and lighting as architectural techniques/mea-
     sures.

     What do architects think about buildings they
     themselves have planned?
     Visit and interview architects and landscape architects and find
     out what they think about their own work. It is useful to under-
     take some research at the locations in question so that you can
     ask the really penetrating questions.

     The park for everyone
     The Sabbatsberg area in Stockholm
     In 1998 a park in Stockholm called Sinnenas Trädgård was
     opened close by Vasa Park in a central location in Stockholm.
     The purpose of this park was to create a garden that would
     function as therapy for elderly persons suffering from dementia.
     When elderly people are forced to leave their home to live in
     special housing, they lose contact with their familiar neighbour-
     hood. One’s previous habits and roles are taken away and
     opportunities for enjoying the outdoors will often be greatly
     reduced. If there is dementia in addition to this, the ability to
     orient oneself in time and space is debilitated.

     Green surroundings are valuable for a person’s day-to-day will
     to live. Being in nature, whether passively or actively, and the
     sensory impressions of green surroundings are important for
     our well-being. A therapeutic garden in which to roam, or
     merely sit and enjoy oneself may prevent restlessness, alleviate
     stress, calm persons with dementia and sharpen their concen-
     tration.

     Sinnenas Trädgård
     Taking a closer look at Sinnenas Trädgård in Stockholm, we see
     that it is designed around familiar elements from private
     gardens and some features of classical monastery gardens.
Sigmund Asmervik. Agricultural   Cities, Buildings and Parks for Everyone, a Universal Design Compendium   55
    University of Norway (NLH)




                                 Fig. 2. Staff, relatives and inhabitants love this garden.


                                  1. Paths meet around a centrally located pond where the water
                                     is shallow. This area is framed by old trees and a pergola
                                     with climbing ivy.
                                  2. Under the wide branches of the old trees we find a beautiful
                                     conservatory.
                                  3. The garden has three entrances. By each entrance there is a
                                     pergola and a gate with sweet-scented climbing roses,
                                     honeysuckle and clematis.
                                  4. The framework consists of a) a wooden fence and b) a
                                     hedge. This provides a sense of space, safety, shelter against
                                     wind and a boundary against the outside traffic.
                                  5. In the north section of the garden we find an old wrought
                                     iron fence facing the Vasa Park where children play and
                                     people walk their dogs. Children laughing and dogs at play
                                     allow visitors to Sinnenas Trädgård to participate in what is
                 Sigmund Asmervik
56                          UNIVERSAL design   Part 1 Europe




           happening without having to worry about being run into by
           children and dogs. Only the sounds of the passing traffic
           bring to mind the fact that the garden is located in a city,
           but this may be an important recollection for those users
           who grew up in a city. Plants in the garden have been se-
           lected with great care to create great variation in a small
           area and to generate the desire to undertake something on
           one’s own. There are flowerbeds and fields, durable lawns, a
           rock-filled flowerbed and a pond with water lilies. The
           garden has retained its century-old chestnuts, its elm grove
           and its hawthorn trees.
      6.   The main walkway faces south and ends in a venerable old
           staircase.
      7.   Left and right of the walkway we find a raised flowerbed in
           granite with old-fashioned plants to stimulate recollection
           and recognition. Flower pergolas frame the flowerbeds with
           hops, roses, Virginia creepers and clematis.
      8.   a) Along the west walkway we find raised flowerbeds with
               wild strawberries, strawberries, raspberries, red currants,
               blackcurrants and gooseberries.
           b) Along the east walkways we find flowerbeds with cut-
               ting flowers, spices and vegetables.
      9.    In the north end we find two groves, one of lilacs and one
            of clematis, scenting the air around comfortable benches
            where visitors can rest and smell the flowers.
     10.   The flowerbeds abound with flowers and fruit, such as
           apples and plums. A lawn frames the main walkway.
     11.   There are many small tables along the raised flowerbed in
           granite inviting people to rest and drink their coffee.
     13.   The summerhouse from 1784 is surrounded by a number of
           small groves with lilies, bracken and forest paths covered
           by bark to create an illusion of being in a forest.
     14.   An exercise railing with larch handrails and wrought iron
           latticework is used to exercise the sense of balance and for
           support when walking.

     Assignments on the park for everyone
     Who are the park’s users?
     Make your own observations using the park. Do you find
     anyone who has obvious accessibility problems? Select various
     groups and interview them regarding their use of the park, and
     whether they find it difficult to find it and orient themselves.
Sigmund Asmervik. Agricultural   Cities, Buildings and Parks for Everyone, a Universal Design Compendium   57
    University of Norway (NLH)



                                 How does the park function for you?
                                 Carry out your own tests, preferably together with a co-student
                                 who has a functional disability. Which barriers are there? How
                                 can they be overcome?

                                 What kind of vegetation benefits various types of users?
                                 Catalogue the vegetation in a park. Try to establish whether
                                 parts of this park are particularly favourable for people with
                                 various types of functional disabilities. In addition to sight, also
                                 consider hearing, smells and allergies. Propose improvements.

                                 References
                                 Asmervik. S. Byer, hus og parker for alle. Institutt for land-
                                    skapsplanlegging, NLF. Ås. 2001.
                                 Cold, B., Fathi, H and Asmervik. S. Evaluering av den over-
                                    dekte gaten på Dragvoll. SINTEF-rapport. Trondheim.1995.
                                 Gonzalez, A and Lacuesta, R. Barcelona Architecture Guide
                                    1929–2000. Editorial Gustavo Gili SA, Barcelona.
                                 Grefsød, E. Terapeutiske hager for personer med demens. Det
                                    Norske Hageselskap/Nasjonalt kompetansesenter for alders-
                                    demens. 2001.
                                 Statsbygg. Universitetssenteret på Dragvoll, Ferdigmelding nr
                                    434/1993.
58   UNIVERSAL design   Part 1 Europe




                                        Photo: FotoKnutsen AS
    Rigmor Leknes/Solveig Dale
Sør-Trøndelag University College,   Universal Design – an Interdisciplinary Challenge                   59
                         Norway




                                    1.3 Universal Design –
                                    an Interdisciplinary
                                    Challenge
                                    Solveig Dale, occupational therapist, public health specialist,
                                    Trondheim.
                                    Rigmor Leknes, post graduate student and lecturer at the
                                    Department of Occupational Therapy, Sør-Trøndelag university
                                    College, Trondheim.


                                    “Oh! It’s so difficult being blind!” groaned architecture student
                                    Wibeke Johansen from NTNU. She was suddenly completely
                                    reliant on the help of occupational therapy student Gunn Berg.

                                    Patches had been placed over Wibeke Johansen’s eyes. The
                                    lights had gone out on her world, so to speak, and the only per-
                                    son who could help her was her companion, Gunn Berg. The
                                    architecture student could no longer orient herself in the
                                    shopping centre and had to be led around by the occupational
                                    therapy student.

                                    This is how the Høgskoleavisa (The University College
                                    Newspaper) introduces a report about the second joint seminar
                                    on universal design in Trondheim (Svanemyr, K., 2000).


                                    History of the seminar
                                    The seminar that is the subject of this chapter was first organi-
                                    sed in the winter of 1999. In November 1997, Husbanken (The
                                    Norwegian State Housing Bank) arranged a working conference
                                    on the educational organisation of universal design and the need
                                    to improve the design of built-up environments (see chapter
                                    1.1). The conference fired the starting gun for the planning of
                                    this seminar. Several of the conference’s participants agreed
                                    that co-operation between the health and technical professions
                                    was not good enough and that co-operation between the rele-
                                    vant parties while they were completing their studies would
                                    probably make these future specialists more willing and able to
                                    work together. Per and Kirsten Lauvås claim: “The different
                                    parties’ attitude of mind, and the way they understand
60                         UNIVERSAL design   Part 1 Europe




     information, are primarily acquired through vocational sociali-
     sation” (Lauvås, K. and Lauvås, P., pg. 150, 1994). The effects
     of vocational socialisation are strongest during the educational
     phase and the first active years of work in the field (ibid).

     For a number of years, the Department of Occupational Therapy
     in Trondheim had been wishing to co-operate more closely on a
     regular basis with the Department of Achitectural Design
     because the results of poor building plans can directly affect
     professional duties of occupational therapists. Practising occu-
     pational therapists quite often come across examples of buil-
     dings that have not been designed with everyone in mind:
     whether it involves doors that are too heavy, door sills that are
     difficult to negotiate, poor signing, difficulty in orienting one-
     self in a building, colours with insufficient contrast for the
     visually impaired, inappropriate placing of kitchen and toilet
     fittings, and the height of entrances (with the consequence that
     ramps have to be adjusted afterwards, etc.) Occupational
     therapists often learn of users’ who have problems coping with
     everyday life due to such planning. Expensive technical
     modifications are often needed to enable these people to
     function well in their surroundings. Such solutions are rarely
     aesthetically attractive or fully functional and are often
     extremely expensive.

     The need for better interdisciplinary co-operation between the
     relevant parties has also been pointed out by architects several
     years ago. Architects Grete Bull and Tore Lange believe that
     interdisciplinary co-operation and user input throughout the
     whole process of designing housing for the functionally dis-
     abled is essential. In their opinion, such co-operation can ensure
     that the user’s needs and input are better represented (Bull, G.,
     et al, 1993).

     To promote interdisciplinary co-operation, it is important that
     the various professional groups participating in the planning
     work are familiar with each other’s areas of expertise, otherwise
     it will be less likely that they will seek out contact with each
     other. Facilitating the interaction of future professionals from
     the relevant areas of study while they are still students is likely
     to increase the possibility of interdisciplinary co-operation in
     their work.

     In the spring of 1998, the Department of Occupational Therapy
     called for a meeting between themselves and the departments of
    Rigmor Leknes/Solveig Dale
Sør-Trøndelag University College,   Universal Design – an Interdisciplinary Challenge                    61
                         Norway



                                    architecture, building engineering and High school of carpen-
                                    try. A representative from the Norwegian State Housing Bank
                                    was present and told the participants of the possibility of recei-
                                    ving financial support for this educational experiment. This
                                    meeting helped to bring about the joint seminar on universal
                                    design. We had to ensure that the date set did not clash with
                                    exams, project periods and practise periods. We agreed that the
                                    date would be co-ordinated by the High school of Carpentry of
                                    Occupational Therapy and early in the autumn of 1998 it was
                                    set for 4 February 1999.

                                    We formed a small working group consisting of five people:
                                    one from the architecture department, one from the High school
                                    of carpentry department of Occupational Therapy, an architect
                                    from the Norwegian State Housing Bank, an architect from
                                    SINTEF and a council occupational therapist from Trondheim
                                    Council. This group was assigned the task of planning the inter-
                                    disciplinary seminar. The working group included some persons
                                    that had their main occupation outside the educating institutions
                                    involved in order to benefit from the expertise these people had
                                    within their respective fields. Three of the participants had pre-
                                    viously conducted several housing seminars for the students of
                                    occupational therapy. The two smaller departments were not
                                    represented in the group because it could have made the group
                                    too large and perhaps made it more difficult to find common
                                    points of reference. However, they were provided with the
                                    minutes of the meetings and participated in the last few meet-
                                    ings. The working climate was open and stimulating, which
                                    encouraged creativity. Several of the participants already knew
                                    each other, and this undoubtedly helped the work go smoothly.
                                    Simultaneously, we had so much confidence in each other that
                                    we dared to object to ideas that were viewed less practicable.
                                    Everyone wanted the seminar to take place, and many of us put
                                    in a lot of work to ensure that the practical arrangements went
                                    smoothly.


                                    Educational aims
                                    The aim of the seminar was for each student to gain:
                                    • Professional knowledge about universal design
                                    • Knowledge about the functionally disabled peoples’ design
                                      needs
                                    • Familiarity with the various professions that participated in
                                      the seminar
62                        UNIVERSAL design   Part 1 Europe




     Contents and methodology
     The working group felt that, in order to achieve these goals, the
     students should first be given a common professional point of
     reference. Most of the students were unfamiliar with the term
     universal design. Architect Poul Østergaard had prepared a CD-
     ROM that presented examples of functionally disabled people’s
     need for functional solutions (Østergaard, P., 1996. Also see
     chapter 1.7). These are good examples of universal design. He
     was invited to present universal design from his perspective.

     We also wanted an occupational therapist to communicate the role
     occupational therapists can play with respect to universal design,
     so that the students on the technical courses would become more
     familiar with the expertise of an occupational therapist.

     We also wanted to engage someone from an organisation for the
     disabled to explain what it was like to encounter obstacles in
     their everyday life. It had been the experience of the department
     of Occupational Therapy that such testimonies from disabled
     people made a strong impression. The examples that were pre-
     sented included the difficulty of getting into shops or not being
     able to sit next to one’s spouse at the theatre because there was
     no place to sit for an attendant in the wheelchair users’ area.

     The working group wanted to employ several different pedago-
     gic methods, since we knew that variation stimulates the lear-
     ning process. We settled on a combination of lectures, video
     and group work. We felt it was important for students to experi-
     ence a disability first hand so that they would better understand
     disabled peoples needs and life situation. According to Gunn
     Imsen, Piaget’s theory says that one probably learns best when
     one actively participates in the learning acquisition process
     (Imsen, G., 1998). One can be active in many ways, such as
     listening, seeing, doing something practical, discussing and cre-
     ating a written work, etc. It is not necessarily so that everyone
     learns best by use of the same teaching methods (ibid).
     However, the effects of teaching and the insights thus gained
     can be enhanced by combining personal experiences with other
     methods of communication.

     The working group also wanted the students to meet each other
     and share experiences and perspectives from the various cour-
     ses. We decided to give them tasks in which they would have to
     use their specialist knowledge and arrive at universal design
     solutions by way of discussion.
    Rigmor Leknes/Solveig Dale
Sør-Trøndelag University College,   Universal Design – an Interdisciplinary Challenge                 63
                         Norway



                                    Motivating the students
                                    We brought in people with international reputation in the area
                                    of universal design in order to increase the appeal and encou-
                                    rage student participation in the seminar.

                                    In order to make the interdisciplinary groups work well, it was
                                    necessary that the participation from the students was as good
                                    as possible. So we did our utmost to inform students well in
                                    advance. The programmes that were printed and distributed had
                                    a nice design, which the architects’ expertise contributed lar-
                                    gely to. The attendance at the seminar was furthermore made
                                    obligatory.




                                    Front page of programme and invitation.
64                        UNIVERSAL design   Part 1 Europe




     The final programme looked like this:

     08.30-09.00 Registration, coffee, tea
     09.00-09.15 Welcome speech by university college lecturer
                 Rigmor Leknes
                 Introduction: Why an interdisciplinary
                 approach?
                 Researcher Karin Høyland, SINTEF
     09.15-09.45 Users’ perspectives
                 Odd Walter Syltevik, The Norwegian Association
                 of the Disabled
     09.45-10.15 Universal design from the point of view of the
                 occupational therapist
                 Occupational therapist Sidsel Bjørnebye, Human
                 Factor Solution
     10.15-10.25 Break
     10.25-11.10 Handicap, architecture and design
                 Professor Poul Østergaard, Århus
     11.10-11.20 The Delta Centre’s film “Universal design –
                 seven points about planning”
                 Professor Tore Brantenberg
     11.20-11.30 Introduction to group work
                 Occupational therapist Solveig Dale
     11.30-13.45 Lunch and group work
     13.45-14.15 Plenary presentations
     14.15-15.45 Accessibility and flexibility in your own work
                 Architect Angelo Mangiarotti, Italy


     Group work
     The group work, including the group tasks, has in our opinion
     been a crucial element of the seminar. In our view it was within
     this setting that the greatest professional and pedagogic deve-
     lopments took place. As we believe it could be both useful and
     inspiring for others to “take part” in these experiences, we have
     chosen to provide a detailed presentation of the group works
     and the different tasks. Each year the group tasks are altered
     and developed on the basis of an evaluation and exchange of
     ideas. We have therefore chosen to present here the group tasks
     from the third seminar we arranged. The group tasks set in the
     first seminar are described in detail in an evaluation report
     (Dale, et al, 1999).
    Rigmor Leknes/Solveig Dale
Sør-Trøndelag University College,   Universal Design – an Interdisciplinary Challenge                     65
                         Norway



                                    The aim of the group work was:
                                    • To promote experience/observation of what it is like to be
                                      functionally disabled and to experience the types of obstacles
                                      that a person with a disability may encounter.

                                    • For the members of the groups to gain an insight into the
                                      expertise possessed by the various professions and how this
                                      breadth of expertise can be exploited with respect to
                                      planning for all.

                                    In all, the following students took part in the seminar:
                                    60 occupational therapy students
                                    60 architecture students
                                    20 building engineering students
                                    10 pupils from the carpentry course at an upper secondary
                                    school

                                    The students were divided into 20 groups of about 7 people
                                    each. This was done in advance, so that the groups would repre-
                                    sent a range of disciplines. One member from each group was
                                    to sit in a wheelchair, one’s sight would be impaired with the
                                    help of special glasses, and one would be blindfolded using eye
                                    patches and sunglasses. These three physically impaired parti-
                                    cipants would each have a partner. The other members of the
                                    group acted as observers.

                                    As part of their course, the occupational therapy students had
                                    had experiences with being physically impaired and were there-
                                    fore assigned the role of companion or observer.

                                    During the introduction to the group work, emphasis was put on
                                    the importance of the students seriously attempting to tackle
                                    difficult situations while playing the role of the disabled person.

                                    The situations were played out both indoors in the university
                                    college building and in the local community in the vicinity of
                                    the college.

                                    Group tasks were allocated as follows:
                                    Four groups experimented with being functionally disabled in a
                                    bathroom. They were each told to find their way to their allo-
                                    cated bathroom/toilet in the building. The participants playing
                                    the role of the functionally disabled persons had to wash their
                                    hands in the sink, brush their teeth, and apply moisturising
                                    cream. They also had to make their way to the toilet.
66                        UNIVERSAL design   Part 1 Europe




     Four groups experienced being functionally disabled in the
     bedroom. They were each told to find their way to their
     bedroom in a small hospital ward at the college. Once in the
     bedroom, the people playing the parts of the functionally dis-
     abled had to try to get in and out of bed. They also had to wash
     their hands in the sink, brush their teeth, apply moisturising
     cream, and open the window to air out the room.

     Two groups made their way to their respective training kitchens.
     Here the people playing the roles of the functionally disabled
     were to make tea and coffee for the whole group with as little
     help as possible.

     Two groups were given the task of finding their way to two
     offices. The people playing the functionally disabled had to
     open a window and try to reach shelves and cupboards as well
     as try out the workstation in front of the computer screen. Part
     of their task included drawing the office. These two groups
     were asked to come up with design changes to the office on the
     basis of different needs.

     Some groups were also assigned tasks outside the college.
     While planning the group work, we tried to benefit from the
     opportunities presented by the college’s local surroundings.
     These included a bus stop, busy roads, a shopping centre, petrol
     station, café, post office and bank.

     Two groups made their way to the shopping centre near the col-
     lege, where they were to shop in the foodstuffs department.

     This meant the groups had very specific tasks and had to find
     their way to the correct products. After shopping, they had to
     find their way to the café on the first floor, where two tables
     had been reserved. Those playing the part of physically disabled
     persons had to order coffee or tea at the counter. While drinking
     their coffee, they had to discuss the joint tasks all the groups
     had been assigned after the experiments.

     Two groups were instructed to find their way to the post office
     and bank in the nearby shopping centre. Here they were told to
     post a letter and deposit NOK 50 into Save the Children’s bank
     account (the groups were each given NOK 50 in an envelope in
     advance).
    Rigmor Leknes/Solveig Dale
Sør-Trøndelag University College,   Universal Design – an Interdisciplinary Challenge                     67
                         Norway




                                                                                        Simulation excercises.
                                                                                        Top: reaching for food
                                                                                        in a shopping centre.
                                                                                        Bottom: Catching a
                                                                                        bus.
68                          UNIVERSAL design    Part 1 Europe




     A couple of groups were instructed to catch a bus. They had to
     find out when the bus was to leave, get to the local shopping
     centre, get off at the bus stop and return to the school along a
     busy road.

     Two groups had to make their way to the petrol station. Here
     they were told to put themselves in the following situation:
     what would it be like for a car driver who was in a wheelchair
     to fill up with petrol and wash the car’s windscreen? Those
     playing the role of functionally disabled people also had to
     purchase a newspaper and visit the toilet before returning to the
     college.




     Problems in the environment as experienced and reported by a student.
    Rigmor Leknes/Solveig Dale
Sør-Trøndelag University College,   Universal Design – an Interdisciplinary Challenge                    69
                         Norway



                                    One group was instructed to find its way to the shopping centre
                                    via a subway. They had to traverse a car park and a zebra cros-
                                    sing. They also had to find a specific shop and pick up some
                                    brochures from there before returning to the college.

                                    At the end of the experiments all the groups were given the
                                    following tasks:

                                    • What impressions were those playing the role of a functio-
                                      nally disabled person left with? Share your experiences.
                                    • What observations had the observers made?
                                    • Based on the experience you now have, discuss the adapta-
                                      tions you will have to take into account when designing with
                                      universal design in mind so that the surroundings you have
                                      just encountered will meet the requirements of universal
                                      design. Give reasons for your answers.
                                    • How can you take advantage of each other’s expertise to
                                      achieve universal design?
                                    • The group tasks should be answered in writing. Prepare
                                      proposals to present in plenary.

                                    Appendix 1, p. 73, illustrates an example of a group task.

                                    Group advisors
                                    Seven teachers were appointed as group advisors in advance.
                                    The advisors gathered immediately after the start of the group
                                    work. They were provided with information about the role and
                                    function of an advisor. The advisors’ task was to visit the
                                    groups after the experiments had been completed. The advisors
                                    were expected to ensure that the process had begun and that it
                                    was moving along and be available should the group need clari-
                                    fication or have questions. The groups had to go through the
                                    process without too much intervention from the advisors. The
                                    advisors were provided with enough money to cover any
                                    expenses the groups might have incurred while carrying out
                                    their group tasks.

                                    Visiting the groups also helped the advisors see which groups
                                    were working well together and might be candidates for making
                                    presentations in plenary. The advisors met again just prior to the
                                    gathering in plenary, discussed their experiences from the
                                    various groups and agreed on which two or three groups would
                                    be asked to present their results.
70                        UNIVERSAL design   Part 1 Europe




     The practical planning of the seminar
     Carrying out the seminar was a relatively comprehensive practi-
     cal business. One person was given the responsibility for co-
     ordination and the practical tasks were assigned to the seminar’s
     working group.

     We strived for the smoothest possible execution of the seminar.
     All the equipment necessary to carry out the group tasks was
     obtained in advance. This included special glasses for those who
     were going to play the role of visually impaired people (which
     can be bought from Blindes Produkter AS, Oslo (see referen-
     ces)), eye patches (obtainable from pharmacies) for those who
     were going to play the role of blind people, and sunglasses to
     wear over the eye patches. The students were given materials and
     pens to be used in overhead projector presentations. This equip-
     ment was put in separate packets for the group leaders.
     Wheelchairs were obtained on loan from a specialist company.

     We obtained class lists in advance of those students that would
     be attending. On the basis of these lists, we decided on the
     make-up of the groups to ensure that each group contained as
     many disciplines as possible. The students were told which
     groups they had been assigned to when they registered. Group
     leaders were picked out in advance. They received written infor-
     mation of the group’s tasks together with all the equipment they
     would need to carry out their assigned tasks. Folders containing
     information about universal design (see Aslaksen, et al, 1997)
     were handed out to each student during registration.

     Tables were reserved in the canteen so the students could sit
     with their groups during lunch, thus allowing them to spend
     more time together. They were given the opportunity to use the
     mealtime for both group work and for social contact, so as to
     get to know each other better.

     Evaluation
     The financial support from the Norwegian State Housing Bank
     was made subject to their receiving an evaluation of the seminar.
     Thorough evaluations from both students and teachers would
     also benefit further developing this educational experiment .
     Questionnaires were prepared, see appendix 2. The results of the
     evaluation are described in detail in a separate evaluation report
     (Dale, S., et al, 1999). Subsequently, the seminar has been evalu-
     ated annually on the basis of these questionnaires.
    Rigmor Leknes/Solveig Dale
Sør-Trøndelag University College,   Universal Design – an Interdisciplinary Challenge                     71
                         Norway



                                    The students were particularly pleased with what they got out of
                                    the lecture by the Norwegian Association of the Disabled and
                                    Østergaard’s CD-ROM (Østergaard, P., 1996). Nevertheless, the
                                    evaluation showed that the group work had had the greatest
                                    impression. Many students said that the experience of being
                                    functionally disabled had had a great emotional impact on
                                    them. They also felt that meeting students from other disci-
                                    plines had been important and useful. Among other things, it
                                    gave them the chance to discuss issues from a number of dif-
                                    ferent perspectives.

                                    Students on the technical courses gave the group work a
                                    somewhat higher evaluation then those on the occupational
                                    therapy course did. This may have something to do with their
                                    experience of trying to cope as a functionally disabled person.
                                    Even though the occupational therapist students had played
                                    these roles previously, they nevertheless felt that the group tasks
                                    had been useful. They said that the discussions following the
                                    experiments had been particularly interesting and educational.

                                    The students thought that the seminar had been very important
                                    in terms of future co-operation. The average mark given for this
                                    question, on a scale from 1-7, was 6.0. However, most students
                                    thought that too little time had been assigned for group work.

                                    Future development of the seminar
                                    All of the departments said the first seminar had been a great
                                    success. It has therefore been held on an annual basis since
                                    1999, albeit with improvements and adjustments to the pro-
                                    gramme. The last lecture was dropped to allow more time for
                                    group work. We have expanded the user representation to
                                    include both the visually and physically disabled. The introduc-
                                    tions are brief. A small group of students from the Institutt for
                                    Samferdsel (Institute of Transport and Communication) also
                                    participate in the seminar. Some group tasks have been adjusted
                                    to accommodate to their needs. The accessibility of both train
                                    and bus terminals will be tested. Next time the seminar is held,
                                    the theoretical part will also include a brief lecture about the
                                    universal design of transport and communication.

                                    Conclusion
                                    In our experience, the seminar’s teaching methods and content
                                    stimulate interdisciplinary co-operation. There is no doubt that
                                    organizing such a seminar is a very demanding challenge. The
72                        UNIVERSAL design   Part 1 Europe




     effort is worthwhile, however, because the results from the eva-
     luations of the seminars are so good. The seminars have already
     given rise to projects where students from different fields work
     together. For instance, occupational therapy students have taken
     part in several major projects together with building enginee-
     ring students. Occupational therapy students have also parti-
     cipated in projects initiated by SINTEF, Institutt for Samferdsel.

     We hope that this event will also be a source of inspiration for
     collaboration after graduation as well. We wholeheartedly
     recommend that other educational institutes initiate similar
     interdisciplinary educational collaboration based on local
     options.


     References
     Aslaksen, F., Bergh, S., Bringa, O. R., Heggem, E. K. (1997):
       Universell utforming. Planlegging og design for alle.
       (Universal Design: Planning and Design for All) Rådet for
       funksjonshemmede I-0909 B
     Blindes Produkter A/S, Postboks 5915, Majorstua, 0308 OSLO,
       Norway. (Tel.: 23 21 55 50)
     Bull, G., Lange, T. and Grut, L. (1993): Råd for uråd.
       Prosjektrapport 117. (A Way Out of the Difficulty: Project
       report 117) Norwegian Building Research Institute/SINTEF
     Dale, S., Høyland, K., Kornstad, S. and Leknes, R. (1999):
       Sammendrag evaluering av seminar den 4. februar 1999.
       (Summary of Evaluation of Seminar Held 4 February 1999)
     Imsen, G. (1998): Elevens verden. (The Pupil’s World) Tano
       Aschehoug
     Lauvås, K., and Lauvås, P. (1994): Tverrfaglig samarbeid.
       Perspektiv og strategi. (Interdisciplinary Co-operation:
       Perspectives and Strategies) TANO
     Svanemyr, K. (2000): Blind for en dag. (Blind for a Day)
       Høgskoleavisa no. 3, 10.02
     Østergaard, P. (1996): Handikap, arkitektur & design.
       (Handicap, Architecture & Design) Christian Ejler’s Forlag.
       Denmark
    Rigmor Leknes/Solveig Dale
Sør-Trøndelag University College,   Universal Design – an Interdisciplinary Challenge                            73
                         Norway



                                    Appendix 1:
                                    Group tasks “Universal Design” Groups
                                    11-12
                                    AIM:
                                    We want the members of the groups to experience/observe what
                                    it is like to be functionally disabled and experience the types of
                                    obstacles a functionally disabled person may encounter.

                                    We also want the members of the groups to gain an insight into
                                    the type of expertise that the various professions possess and
                                    how this can be used with respect to designing and planning for
                                    all groups of users.

                                    FUNCTIONAL DISABILITIES:
                                    One person in the group will sit in a wheelchair. The person can
                                    use both of their arms but neither of their legs. One person in
                                    the group will be visually impaired and the other blindfolded.
                                    The blindfolded person will have a companion. Occupational
                                    students will act as observers or companions of the blind. The
                                    other group members will act as observers of the experiments.

                                    TASK:
                                    Make your way to the KBS shopping centre. Shop in the KBS
                                    food department. Those playing the role of a functionally dis-
                                    abled person must buy the following:

                                    The person in the wheelchair                   The person who is visually
                                    must buy:                                      impaired must buy:
                                    1 tub of yoghurt                               1 tin of mackerel in tomato
                                                                                   sauce
                                    1 tin of peaches                               1 packet of macaroni

                                    The person who is blind must buy:
                                    1 apple
                                    1 packet of dry yeast

                                    Make your way to the café in KBS, where a table has been
                                    reserved for the group. Each of you must buy your own cup of
                                    coffee or tea. Those of you who are functionally disabled must
                                    pay for the observers.

                                    While you are drinking your coffee/tea, discuss the following:
                                    • What impressions have those playing the role of a functio-
74                           UNIVERSAL design   Part 1 Europe




       nally disabled person been left with? Share your experiences.
     • What observations have the observers made?
     • Based on the experience you now have, discuss what adjust-
       ments you will have to take into account when designing with
       universal design in mind so that the surroundings you have
       just encountered will satisfy universal design requirements.
       Give reasons for your answers.
     • How can you take advantage of each other’s expertise to
       achieve universal design?

     If you start to run out of time, you can return to the college in a
     non-disabled state. Bring the receipts for the food and
     coffee/tea with you. Your expenses will be refunded today.

     The group task must be answered in writing. Prepare
     proposals to present in plenary.


     Appendix 2:
     Evaluation form for seminar on
     universal design
     We want your feedback on your outcome of today, along with
     any suggestions you may have for improvements in the event
     the exercise is repeated.

     We need to know what course you are currently taking:

     Tick relevant course:

     Civil architecture, 2nd year

     Civil architecture, 3rd year

     Occupational studies

     Building engineering studies

     High schoolCarpentry studies

     High school Bricklaying studies
    Rigmor Leknes/Solveig Dale
Sør-Trøndelag University College,   Universal Design – an Interdisciplinary Challenge                          75
                         Norway




 1) To what degree have you benefited educationally from the various lectures and group work?

    Give your evaluation by ticking off on a scale of 1–7
                                   None                                          Average        A great deal
                                    1           2         3                        4        5      6      7

 User perspective
                                        1               2             3                 4   5      6      7

 Universal design from the
 occupational therapist’s
 point of view
                                        1               2             3                 4   5      6      7

 Handicap, architecture
 and design
                                        1               2             3                 4   5      6      7

 The Delta Centre’s film
                                        1               2             3                 4   5      6      7

 Group work
                                        1               2             3                 4   5      6      7

 Accessibility and flexibility
 in your own work
                                        1               2             3                 4   5      6      7


 2) What was the most interesting and educational part?




 3a) Were you familiar with the perspective of universal design previously?

    Tick off on a scale of 1-7

                                        Not                                     Somewhat                Very
                                        at all

                                         1              2              3                4   5      6      7
76                                                         UNIVERSAL design   Part 1 Europe




     b) To what extent do you feel that universal design is relevant to your own subject?

                                       Not relevant Average relevance                     Very relevant

                                       1           2          3          4           5           6      7


     GROUP WORK
     a) How well did the interdisciplinary co-operation succeed during the group task?

       Tick off on a scale of 1-7
                                       Very poorly                 Average                       Very well

                                       1           2          3          4           5           6      7


     b) To what extent do you feel your specialist knowledge contributed to the group
        co-operation?

       Tick off on a scale of 1-7
                                       Not very                    Average                    A great deal

                                       1           2          3          4           5           6      7


     c) Was the group task relevant to someone with your professional background?

       Tick off on a scale of 1-7
                                       Not very                    Average                           Very

                                       1           2          3          4           5           6      7


     d) What was the most useful experience you gained from the group work?




     e) For those of you who experienced being functionally disabled; what did you
        learn from being “visually impaired”, “blind” or “wheelchair bound”?
    Rigmor Leknes/Solveig Dale
Sør-Trøndelag University College,   Universal Design – an Interdisciplinary Challenge                       77
                         Norway



f) What group task were you given?
                             Group task no.: __________


5) What effect may such a joint seminar have on future interdisciplinary co-operation?

  Tick off on a scale of 1-7

                                      No effect                            Average           Great effect

                                      1               2              3             4    5       6      7


6a) Do you think that other professions should be represented at such a seminar?

  Tick off one of the boxes
         Yes                              No



b) If you answered yes to the previous question, which professions?




7) To what extent were your expectations for the seminar fulfilled?

                                      Not fulfilled                        Average      To a great extent

                                      1               2              3             4    5       6      7


8) Was there anything about the seminar’s content, organisation and arrangement that you felt
   was particularly noteworthy?
78                                                        UNIVERSAL design   Part 1 Europe




     9) If such a seminar were to be held again, do you have any suggestions for how it might be
        improved?

       Write down your suggested changes:

       Evaluation form for seminar on universal design

       We want your feedback on how relevant and useful you judge this seminar to be for your stu-
       dents/pupils.

       Which course do you teach?

       Civil Architecture, 2nd year         Civil Architecture, 3rd year

       Occupational therapy                 Building Engineering

       Carpentry


     1) To what extent have the lectures and group work been relevant for your students/pupils?

     Tick off on a scale of 1-7 to give your evaluation

                                        Not at all                Average                    Very high
                                        1          2         3          4           5        6       7
     User perspective
                                        1           2        3          4           5        6       7

     Universal design from the
     occupational therapist’s
     point of view
                                        1           2        3          4           5        6       7

     Handicap, architecture
                                        1           2        3          4           5        6       7

     The Delta Centre’s film
                                        1           2        3          4           5        6       7

     Group work
                                        1           2        3          4           5        6       7

     Accessibility and flexibility
     in your own work
                                        1           2        3          4           5        6       7
    Rigmor Leknes/Solveig Dale
Sør-Trøndelag University College,   Universal Design – an Interdisciplinary Challenge                 79
                         Norway



2) Have your students/pupils been taught anything about the term universal design before?




3) Will students receive more instruction on this subject during the course of their studies?




4) Do you feel that such a seminar might improve interdisciplinary co-operation in future careers?




5) To what extent have your own expectations for the seminar been fulfilled?




6) Was there anything about the seminar’s content, organisation and arrangement that you felt
   was particularly noteworthy?




7) If such a seminar were to be held again, do you have any suggestions for how it might be
   improved?




8) Do you think it would be relevant for your course to participate in a similar seminar next year?
80   UNIVERSAL design   Part 1 Europe




                                        Photo: FotoKnutsen AS
                  Maarten Wijk
Delft University of Technology,   If Anything, Call It Ergonomics – in Search for a Word in a World Called Science   81
               the Netherlands




                                  1.4 If Anything, Call It
                                  Ergonomics – in Search
                                  for a Word in a World
                                  Called Science
                                  Prof. Maarten Wijk MSc. Department of Architecture, Delft
                                  University of Technology


                                  Introduction
                                  In October 1996 an academic chair called “Accessibility” was
                                  installed at the Department of Architecture of the Delft
                                  University of Technology. The mission of this chair was – and
                                  still is – to improve accessibility awareness in architectural
                                  training. The precise motivation and ambitions of the chair were
                                  addressed during the inaugural speech of its managing pro-
                                  fessor – the author of this article – held in 1997 and published
                                  in English under the name of “Differences we share” (Wijk,
                                  1997). In this chapter the author describes his general attitude
                                  towards the issue of improving accessibility awareness since the
                                  installation of the chair, and what it – in his professional
                                  opinion – all seems to come down to: the search for a word in a
                                  culture heading for science.

                                  Golden opportunity
                                  Admitted: it is a considerable advantage to be able to introduce
                                  a traditionally neglected issue in the curriculum of a design
                                  institute, when its necessity to do so is recognised by means of
                                  an academic chair. A chair is the carrier of the institute’s values.
                                  Nonetheless, within the common culture of the institute, there is
                                  still a huge challenge to find the most adequate vehicle to
                                  spread the message and to fulfil the ultimate objective, which is
                                  – to put it simply – good design.

                                  If one brings down teaching to its essence, it is all about finding
                                  words which hit the state of mind of the receiver, of the archi-
                                  tectural student, of fellow teachers and of the common culture
                                  as a whole. By tradition students just have one ambition, and
                                  that is to be one of the top designers of their generation.
82                        UNIVERSAL design   Part 1 Europe




     Anything seemingly leading away from that ambition is
     considered to be off the road. However, what is to be considered
     “top design”, depends on the contemporary culture at the insti-
     tute in question.

     Well, due to globalisation and competition amongst different
     schools of architectural training, at the beginning of the new
     millennium the institute’s output is seriously heading towards
     an evaluation of its scientific merits. After all, graduated
     architectural designers are internationally to be called Masters
     of Science. Therefore teaching architectural design must have a
     scientific approach and its output must be scientifically
     explicit.

     Being one of the major architecture institutes in the world and
     wishing to stay that way, or even be the best, the Department of
     Architecture is eager to improve its scientific image. Research
     by Design becomes a mainstream issue. For raising accessibi-
     lity awareness, it would be a waste not to embrace an opportu-
     nity like this. However, making use of the opportunity demands
     a clever use of words which must be recognised inside the
     mainstream of design, where there is only a distinction between
     good and bad design. “Inclusive Design”, “Design for All”,
     “Universal Design” are not the proper phrases and, for that
     matter, the word Accessibility is not either, stigmatised as it
     unfortunately has become.

     A Stigma
     Initially it seemed like such a good word: Accessibility. How
     could designers possibly misinterpret it? My daughter was three
     years old when I asked her what the word accessibility meant.
     After a few moments’ reflection, she answered, “Accessibility is
     when you have a door.” Delighted by its simplicity, I often
     quoted my daughter’s definition. When I asked her the same
     question many years later, she gave the same reply half of those
     asked give: “Accessibility has something to do with handi-
     capped people.” The remaining fifty percent has no idea what it
     means.

     As accessibility adviser to the Dutch Government Buildings
     Agency (Rijksgebouwendienst), I visit a lot of governmental
     buildings. I always call in advance to make an appointment with
     the facility manager of the building. “What a coincidence, we
     just installed an invalid lift in our reception hall.” “That’s won-
                  Maarten Wijk
Delft University of Technology,   If Anything, Call It Ergonomics – in Search for a Word in a World Called Science   83
               the Netherlands



                                  derful”, I reply, “but actually, I’d like to see the entire building
                                  and also to inspect such things as the accessibility of the work
                                  locations.” “But,” he says, sounding a bit doubtful about the
                                  purpose of my visit, “we don’t employ any handicapped people
                                  here.” Nevertheless, I manage to make an appointment. On the
                                  way there, I painstakingly try to come up with a synonym for
                                  accessibility so that the conversation will proceed more fluently.
                                  I fail to find it.

                                  At the time of my inauguration, the newspapers regarded me as
                                  “the professor whose job will be to remove thresholds”. A large
                                  national daily newspaper published an article entitled “The
                                  Threshold Professor” calling me a Professor in Barrierology.
                                  When introduced to architect and fellow professor Carel
                                  Weeber in the doorway of his room, he asked if he should now
                                  remove the sill of the doorway into his room. “That depends,” I
                                  replied, “on whether you are expecting visitors”, and thought:
                                  “never mind….”.

                                  Right at the beginning of my appointment I started to have
                                  doubts about the choice of this word. How would I explain to
                                  family and friends that I have been appointed merely to lecture
                                  about thresholds? Added to that, I know nothing about thres-
                                  holds. Every time I am lost in thought and trip over the sill of
                                  the door into my own room, I wonder: what purpose do those
                                  little sills serve anyway?

                                  There wouldn’t be much against this limited association of
                                  thresholds with the so-called Disabled, if it would actually lead,
                                  as a matter of course, to built environments completely acces-
                                  sible to this user category. But what happens is the opposite. For
                                  some reason or other, the building industry is not particularly
                                  interested in solving the problems of this small group, which it
                                  fears to think about. Efforts in the field of accessibility remain,
                                  thus, incidental acts of charity. It is a welfare issue.

                                  The stigma is historically understandable, but academically
                                  speaking odd. The Dutch definition for accessibility – as used
                                  since 1990 – is of a very basic nature. According to its defi-
                                  nition, accessibility is the feature of built facilities which enable
                                  people to reach and use those facilities (CCPT, 1990). It sounds
                                  like the very nature of architecture, instead of being some sort
                                  of additional quality. It shows how tricky the use of words can
                                  be.
84                         UNIVERSAL design   Part 1 Europe




     Architectural design as a science
     Despite its stigma, the need for raising accessibility awareness
     is obvious. As suggested earlier, a scientific design attitude
     might just be the right vehicle to spread the message. Question
     is: what is science?

     The first criterion for science is the capacity of a discipline to
     constantly improve its output. The scientific approach is based
     on consequently deepening the insights of its paradigms, and
     even renews the paradigms once in a while. Does architectural
     design fit this picture?

     At the beginning of the twentieth century architecture was
     strongly associated with science. New building technologies
     were – for example – compared with the high-tech automobile
     industry. Architecture and city planning were subject to a
     scientific approach. It seemed science really got hold of our
     environment since the proclamation of the CIAM principles. Or
     are we looking at self fulfilling prophecies here?

     In either way, the concepts of Le Corbusier and his colleagues
     had an enormous impact on the image of our planet. The
     Romans were in this respect a lot more modest. A Roman city
     – for example (fig. 1) – must have been a beautiful environment
     two thousand years ago, embracing its romantic society. In
     modern times we build differently. Fig. 2 shows a picture of the
     latest output of architectural design, the Dutch Pavilion at the
     Expo 2000. The building fools around with gravity, and by
     doing so, provides its visitors with an experience, which they
     never had before.
                  Maarten Wijk
Delft University of Technology,   If Anything, Call It Ergonomics – in Search for a Word in a World Called Science   85
               the Netherlands




                                  Fig. 1. A Roman city must have been a beautiful environment two thou-
                                  sand years ago.
86                          UNIVERSAL design       Part 1 Europe




     Fig. 2. The Dutch Pavilion at the Expo 2000



     The capacity of enforcing new experiences may lead to the
     conclusion that architecture is a product of science. But then
     again, architecture is not only about spectacular experiences. In
     most cases it is just a facilitation of ordinary activities: a
     building to work and a house to live in.

     Certainly less spectacular is the way we build houses in The
     Netherlands. Since 1800 we have been building houses as
     shown in fig. 3. Now we do it as shown in fig. 4. I must admit I
     hardly see any changes. Maybe the bricks have a different size
     now, or a different shade. New houses may be environmentally
     correct and may be built more efficiently. However, in the
     theory which I want to address in this chapter, it does not really
     matter whether the looks of buildings changed or not. I am not
     particularly curious about the form and technical aspects of
     built products. I am curious about the performance. Do new
     buildings actually perform better than old buildings?
                  Maarten Wijk
Delft University of Technology,   If Anything, Call It Ergonomics – in Search for a Word in a World Called Science   87
               the Netherlands




                                  Fig. 3. Dutch homes in the 1800.




                                  Fig. 4. Modern Dutch homes.




                                  Let us take a look at the automobile industry. Around 1900
                                  automobiles looked like carriages without horses. Within only
                                  one century we all drive around in highly sophisticated machi-
                                  nery with cruise control, remote control, route navigation, ABS,
                                  air conditioning, and air bags (fig. 5). A different form: yes, dif-
                                  ferent technologies: yes, but certainly a better performance:
                                  new cars are faster, relatively cheaper, safer, have more comfort
                                  and we can choose any model we want. These are all function
                                  driven innovations. It makes automobiles products of science.
88                          UNIVERSAL design   Part 1 Europe




     Fig. 5. Modern, sophisticated designs.



     To be able to say whether architectural design is scientific is to
     measure it with the universal principles of a scientific design
     approach. We all know them. First we have a box. It stands for
     the brains of the designer. There is going information into The
     Box – the input – and out of The Box comes the output, which
     is a design of some sort. Science demands that the output is
     evaluated. If the design does not comply with the input, some-
     thing must have gone wrong in The Box.

     However, even if the output complies with the input, we will not
     be quite sure whether the output is the best solution for the
     problem. We must find out whether the input was valid by com-
     paring it with the latest insights. By consequently validating the
     input, every time a process is going through The Box, the out-
     put will perform better than before. This is a scientific appro-
     ach. This simple scientific design model should also apply to
     architectural design.




     Fig. 6. The Box.
                  Maarten Wijk
Delft University of Technology,   If Anything, Call It Ergonomics – in Search for a Word in a World Called Science   89
               the Netherlands



                                  We have The Box (fig. 6), which is a student, a teacher, or an
                                  architect who was a student once. He is either a genius or an
                                  average designer, but in both cases a Master of Science. The
                                  input of an architectural design process consists basically of:

                                  – functional values (which refer to what we need),
                                  – situational values and restrictions (which refer to what we
                                    will influence),
                                  – the budget (which is what we are willing to pay), and finally
                                  – technical values (which deal about how we can comply).

                                  The output is obviously a design for a building, which is
                                  basically:

                                  –   facilitating people so that they can work or live there,
                                  –   in harmony with its surroundings,
                                  –   within the budget, and
                                  –   properly constructed.

                                  In this model the input will – of course – be validated and the
                                  output evaluated. And logically the functional values form the
                                  basis of this model: they are the very reason why we design in
                                  the first place. Let us take a look at those functional values.
                                  These aspects might be:

                                  –   Image (to be able to associate with the building),
                                  –   Use (to function as you wish and can),
                                  –   Safety (to feel secure and be secure),
                                  –   Health (to stay breathing), and
                                  –   Flexibility (to be able to change).

                                  One could look at these aspects at all kinds of levels. To men-
                                  tion three, these levels might be:

                                  – Our Society (which are our common cultures),
                                  – An Organisation (which may be a company or a household),
                                    and
                                  – The Individual (who is you and I, he and she).

                                  By crossing the functional aspects with these three levels, one
                                  gets a matrix which has to be filled with input validated know-
                                  ledge (fig. 7). This is a rather complex matter, because – though
                                  people share the same needs – people differ in what they expect
                                  at each level with regard to the values.
90                        UNIVERSAL design   Part 1 Europe




     Fig. 7. Matrix



     In society people are – for example – rich or poor, white or
     black, catholic or protestant. Organisations differ in several
     ways, in size, in image, in kind of activities, in lifecycle, and
     within organisations people have all kinds of different functions
     from the management to the work floor. Households are big or
     small, we are a single or a partially couple. As individuals
     people are – of course – all unique. The chapter deals with this
     later.

     So, people are all different, and this makes architectural design
     rather complex. It comes with the status of the discipline. And
     if indeed a designer succeeds in creating a building which
     meets the matrix filled with validated values, one can say: yes,
     architectural design is Science, and the output can be labelled
     Architecture.

     A Mismatch
     But how about the following empirical data; are these master-
     pieces of science?
     – Glass towers being used as a library, despite the fact that
        science learned ages ago that books should be stored in dark,
        cold places (fig. 8, Library of France, Paris, architect
        Perrault)
     – An unprotected hole in the floor, in which my and anyone’s
        daughter might easily fall down (fig. 9, KunstHal,
        Rotterdam, Architect: Koolhaas).
     – A quite slippery-when-wet surface at a pedestrian route (fig.
        10, Bridge, Bilbao, Architect: Calatrava).
     – An unpredictable slippery-when-wet square, which is also
        hard to climb on with anything on wheels (fig. 11,
        Schouwburgplein, Rotterdam, Architect: Geuze).
     – A slippery-when-wet-part-three glass floor, leading to a slope
                  Maarten Wijk
Delft University of Technology,   If Anything, Call It Ergonomics – in Search for a Word in a World Called Science   91
               the Netherlands



                                    which starts with a step, a slope which is too steep and has no
                                    safety measures at the most hazardous spots, a slope which
                                    leads to the main entrance, which could have been at street
                                    level in the first place. Not a product of a scientist I might
                                    add, but the signature of a perverted form fetishist with
                                    slippery-when-wet client (fig. 12, AZL Head Office,
                                    Heerlen, Architect: Arets).




                                  Fig. 8. Library of France, Paris.
92                          UNIVERSAL design   Part 1 Europe




     Fig. 9. KunstHal, Rotterdam.
                  Maarten Wijk
Delft University of Technology,   If Anything, Call It Ergonomics – in Search for a Word in a World Called Science   93
               the Netherlands




                                  Fig. 10. Bridge, Bilbao.
94                          UNIVERSAL design   Part 1 Europe




     Fig. 11. Schouwburgplein, Rotterdam.




     Fig. 12. AZL Head Office, Heerlen.



     Well, these are all examples of exceptional architecture, which
     operates above the laws of science. It is Art. Okay, I can appre-
     ciate this thought. However, it is not only highly respected
     architecture which creates a mismatch between environment
     and its use. The following examples are considered to be middle
     of the road architectural output, and what do we see?
                  Maarten Wijk
Delft University of Technology,   If Anything, Call It Ergonomics – in Search for a Word in a World Called Science   95
               the Netherlands



                                  – Something silly like a doorbell out of reach (fig. 13),
                                  – A stairway quite hazardous to walk on (fig.14), and
                                  – A typical Dutch ladder (fig.15). Hardly scientific, since
                                    Adam and Eve already knew how best to climb stairs, and we
                                    are obviously not able to make them walk safely.




                                  Fig. 13. A doorbell out of reach.
96                          UNIVERSAL design   Part 1 Europe




     Fig. 14 A hazardous stairway.
                  Maarten Wijk
Delft University of Technology,   If Anything, Call It Ergonomics – in Search for a Word in a World Called Science   97
               the Netherlands




                                  Fig. 15. A typical Dutch ladder.




                                  It is as if we design buildings which seem to function properly –
                                  and which do function to a certain extent – but which also con-
                                  sist of mismatches between the image, use, safety, health and
                                  flexibility asked for, and what has been provided. This mis-
                                  match between man and environment can be visualised by a
                                  square and a circle (fig. 16). The circle represents the needs of
                                  people, the square represents the performance of the building.
                                  You can see the mismatch. Where does it come from?
98                         UNIVERSAL design   Part 1 Europe




     Fig. 16. Mismatch between man and environment.



     In search of a match
     It may be obvious that both exceptional design and middle of the
     road architecture have hardly anything to do with a scientific
     design approach. A scientific design approach would have recog-
     nised the mismatch and would have dealt with it sufficiently over
     the ages. We all would have been living in universal space, hap-
     pily ever after. But the truth is that the functional performance of
     buildings did not significantly improve compared with other
     kinds of products. The question is how to overcome the mismatch
     and help design institutes to gain their scientific status.

     Designing for The Disabled
     What should be taken care of is to update the design input used.
     This can be done by investigating the experiences of people
     when they actually make use or try to make use of a building.
     When doing so, one might find that people meet all kinds of
     problems functioning in and around built facilities. Obviously
     the so-called Disabled do. This is indeed so obvious, that it
     might lead to the conclusion, that the needs of “The Disabled”
     are the proper input for good (scientifically correct) design.
     However, Designing for The Disabled means (and implies)
     implicit design with special facilities attached for special user
     categories, whether one calls it – for example – Universal
     Design, or not. In the diagram you can see little squares around
     the square of implicit design, representing the specific needs of
     categories. These little squares do not fill the circle and they are
     isolated (fig. 17).
                  Maarten Wijk
Delft University of Technology,   If Anything, Call It Ergonomics – in Search for a Word in a World Called Science   99
               the Netherlands




                                  Fig. 17. Implicit design. Mismatch for some user categories.



                                  Therefore designing for the Disabled still results in buildings
                                  where people catch their sleeve on the door handle (and spill
                                  coffee on the floor), where people get annoyed by a child ratt-
                                  ling the flap of the letterbox because it cannot reach the door-
                                  bell, where luggage is crushed in a turnstile, where a high heel
                                  is lost in a floor grating, heads bump against awnings because
                                  spectacles are steamed up, and where people may break their
                                  neck on the stairs. People tend to think that these are just every-
                                  day inconveniences, caused by their own clumsiness. But in
                                  fact, designers have not been using the right input for their
                                  design processes. Designing for the disabled is no design
                                  science.

                                  Integral Approach
                                  Standardised men and women do not exist, nor do The
                                  Disabled. People are all diverse. We are thin or fat, short or tall,
                                  strong or weak. Sometimes we cannot see or hear well, and our
                                  minds can change gradually or suddenly from being clear-
                                  minded to confused. Unacquainted with a city, we can get lost –
                                  whether this happens occasionally or all the time, it happens to
                                  everybody at one time or another.
100                           UNIVERSAL design    Part 1 Europe




      This phenomenon was recognised at the beginning of the
      1990s. Consumer organisations started to develop a new appro-
      ach, which was called the Integral Approach. The strategy is to
      combine the special needs of categories into one package of
      requirements, and emphasising that not only people with disabi-
      lities benefit from the measurements, but also other categories
      like children, the elderly and people with luggage and prams.




      Fig. 18. Integral approach – still a mismatch.



      This integral approach can be put in a diagram as well (fig. 18).
      As you can see the square has grown, covering parts of the
      special needs, but not covering the whole circle. There is still a
      mismatch. The design input will still not pass the test, but who
      cares, the university does not even know about this input, it
      knows nothing at all about the topic, that is, before the installa-
      tion of the chair. The so-called Integral Approach – which could
      have been called Universal Design – is no design science. It
      goes much deeper than that, and is more obvious still.

      Ergonomic Diversity
      There are two major concerns. First of all we have the designer.
      Architectural designers have been trained over the ages to be-
      lieve that they are to interpret the functional values of the buil-
                  Maarten Wijk
Delft University of Technology,   If Anything, Call It Ergonomics – in Search for a Word in a World Called Science   101
               the Netherlands



                                  dings they designed according to their own merits. But it may
                                  even be more concerning than that. When a student is explicitly
                                  asked what functionality he is expecting from the environment,
                                  he has no clue. He is simply not trained to look for the user
                                  aspect at all. His major concern is appearance, i.e. what the
                                  design looks like. Above that all, he has learned that this omis-
                                  sion is in fact considered to be a quality in the educational cul-
                                  ture: His examples are rewarded with glossy – people free –
                                  pictures in respected architecture magazines. Designers Only.

                                  Secondly, there are the traditional accessibility promoters with
                                  their categorical interest in addressing the specific needs of
                                  groups, maintaining the assumption that man can be seen as a
                                  set of categories. People all differ, but they are still being repre-
                                  sented as categories. However, the sum of categorical needs is
                                  not the same as covering the needs of all people. When thinking
                                  in categories one overlooks the needs people share. There are
                                  only individuals, each changing their behaviour and capacities
                                  every second of the day. The strategy is not to think in terms of
                                  people, but to look at every single aspect of human functioning.
                                  What should be done, is dividing human needs into separate
                                  aspects of functioning, and then search for the proper values to
                                  cover the extremes in each of these aspects (fig. 19).




                                  Fig. 19. Proper values to cover the extremes. No mismatch.
102                         UNIVERSAL design   Part 1 Europe




      Aspects of functioning are just the ordinary things which
      people do to function in the environment, like seeing, hearing,
      feeling, touching, smelling, recognising, understanding, appre-
      ciating, moving around, operating, breathing, staying warm, and
      cooling down. Once these aspects are seen in the light of human
      diversity, it is possible to validate the functional values concer-
      ning all kinds of environmental parameters like lightning,
      acoustics, temperature, space and texture.

      Epilogue
      From 1997 up to 2001 the academic chair of accessibility –
      myself and Ita Luten – has been working on a book for teaching
      purposes, deepening this ergonomic approach into pragmatic
      design methods and criteria, to be used in several stages of
      interior design, architectural design and city planning. It will be
      published (in Dutch) by the Delft University Press in October
      2001 (working title: Mens & Omgeving – People in their
      environment, M. Wijk I. Luten, 2001).

      To address our work at the Delft University, we use the phrase
      “Ergonomics of the build environment”, covering all environ-
      mental parameters which enables people to function effectively
      and comfortably, safely and healthy in the environment, recog-
      nising the common needs of people in general and the needs of
      the individual to reach for all its rich diversity. If students are
      trained to take this scientific approach to their discipline seri-
      ously, there is no way past an ergonomic approach based on
      people the way they are: diverse but with common needs. No
      word is needed to express the obvious, but if one calls it any-
      thing: call it ergonomics. As mentioned to my dean, November
      2000.
                  Maarten Wijk
Delft University of Technology,   If Anything, Call It Ergonomics – in Search for a Word in a World Called Science   103
               the Netherlands



                                  References
                                  CCPT, European manual for an accessible built environment,
                                    CCPT, Rijswijk, 1990.

                                  Wijk, M., Differences we share (original title: Niets menselijks
                                    is ons vreemd), Publikatiebureau Bouwkunde Faculteit TU
                                    Delft, Delft, 1997.
104   UNIVERSAL design   Part 1 Europe




                                         Photo: FotoKnutsen AS
              Jim Sandhu
Inclusive Design Research   Multi-Dimensional Evaluation as a Tool in Teaching Universal Design    105
                      UK




                            1.5 Multi-Dimensional
                            Evaluation as a Tool in
                            Teaching Universal
                            Design
                            Prof. Jim Sandhu, Inclusive Design Research Associates,
                            Jesmond, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.


                            Introduction
                            Universal design has come a long way since its inception. Some
                            of its principles and objectives have been outlined and to a
                            lesser extent some of its applications have been verified. But
                            there is an urgent need to expand these to ensure its continuing
                            evolution. For example, how can the limits/parameters of
                            universal design be established under wide-ranging situations
                            and contexts? What metrics do we use to evaluate success?
                            How do we incorporate the fast pace of globalisation in order to
                            ensure that resources are used frugally: that design can work
                            alongside nature, not against it; that the scale of solutions mat-
                            ches the scale of the problems? How can universal design
                            ensure the continuous flow of value, seamlessness, sustainabi-
                            lity and the quality of life of a significant number of human
                            beings? What is the most effective approach to teach universal
                            design for future generations?

                            This chapter endeavours to address some of the issues described
                            above with a particular focus on the built environment.

                            In order to understand the impact of universal design on the
                            built environment such as housing and city-scapes it is crucial
                            to understand the background of universal design and its devel-
                            opment. It is interesting to observe that in Japan design power
                            has for decades been widely accepted as being central not only
                            to the quality of spiritual life but also of product wholeness and
                            market power. In the typical Bushido code good design is seen
                            as the creation of a product or environment that is totally right,
                            made in the right way to meet user needs, of the right material,
                            at the right price, to the right specification, to deliver the right
106                         UNIVERSAL design   Part 1 Europe




      performance. Whilst this proto-universal design approach has
      clearly been successful in Japan it is difficult to objectify and
      translate it to other cultures – more so, in the context of
      teaching.

      Universal Design
      The title covers a range of over-lapping phrases whose adhe-
      rents usually claim exclusive rights and insights to their own
      particular version. Some of the more popular ones are: inclu-
      sive design, design-for-all, barrier-free design, transgeneratio-
      nal design, design-for-the-broader-average and design-for-the
      non-average as coined by the author for a new course for post-
      graduate architectural students at the Polytechnic of Central
      London in 1973. Despite their varying focus the essence of all
      these definitions can be synthesised into ‘universal design’.

      Universal design is the concept which focuses on achieving
      accessibility to structures, products and services by planning
      for the fullest range of human functions at the blueprint stage.
      The two main goals of universal design are (1) to enable acces-
      sibility to the widest range of individuals and (2) to eliminate
      the need for retrofitting and reconstruction. Universal design is
      one aspect of a larger trend in the design fields described by
      Weisman as the “politics of inclusion and wholeness” in place
      of the patronising “politics of tolerance and competing inter-
      ests”. Fundamentally, it is an approach that values and cele-
      brates human diversity. Above all, it highlights a major
      paradigm shift – from treating people as part of the medical
      model, as dependent, passive recipients of care, to a model
      where people are treated as equal citizens and disability is seen
      to be either irrelevant or merely as a social construct.


      With the above broad characteristics of universal design in
      mind it can best be illustrated using the following simple
      diagram:
              Jim Sandhu
Inclusive Design Research   Multi-Dimensional Evaluation as a Tool in Teaching Universal Design    107
                      UK



                            The shaded area at the top of the bell curve depicts mainstream
                            design which largely ignores universal design principles thereby
                            excluding a greater range and number of people, especially
                            those who are disabled, elderly, left-handed, colour blind, poor,
                            etc. Ironically, this lack of consideration also results in a
                            smaller market-base. The bottom dotted line highlights that it is
                            possible to enlarge the range and number of users, and the
                            potential market base by using universal design precepts culled
                            from validation, verification and. evaluation exercises.

                            Brief History
                            The main thesis of this article is that evaluation as a process is a
                            crucial platform for teaching universal design principles. This
                            statement is supported by the author’s thirty years of experience
                            carrying out wide-ranging evaluations and then applying the
                            results to teaching design, supervising postgraduate research
                            and generally bringing about greater awareness of design
                            issues. In 1973 when starting a new post-graduate course for
                            architects this exercise consisted of practical design projects
                            focusing on multiple disabilities, lectures by eminent leaders in
                            fields such as design methods, politics, policy, ergonomics,
                            housing, etc., and visits to mental hospitals, special care units,
                            doss houses, homes for the elderly, run down city-scapes etc.

                            From 1979, based at the Special Needs Research Unit (SNRU),
                            University of Northumbria, most of the evaluation work resul-
                            ted from consultancy contracts and covered a range of building
                            types, wheelchairs, public transport and transport information,
                            domestic and specialised products, playgrounds kitchens, com-
                            puter systems and accessories, assistive technology, telematics,
                            packaging, etc. Some of the clients who funded the evaluation
                            of just under 400 separate items included British Gas,
                            Consumers Association, Research Institute for Consumer
                            Affairs, European Commission, Safeways Plc, the Passenger
                            Transport Authority, New World Cookers Plc, and Newcastle
                            City Council.

                            The multi-dimensionality (which is elaborated later) of the title
                            emerged from cost, economic and social impact considerations
                            on some contracts and from the fact that the projects were
                            entirely targeted at disabled or older people. This brought into
                            play serious ergonomic and human factor considerations related
                            to extreme physical, sensory, cognitive and learning limitations
                            of potential users.
108                           UNIVERSAL design    Part 1 Europe




      Evaluation3
      So what is evaluation? It is concerned with gathering informa-
      tion through the involvement of users about the usability or
      potential usability of a product, environment or system in order
      either to improve or assess its functionality and to provide gene-
      ric feedback for related range of products. Without evaluation a
      design reaching end-users would be untried and would merely
      reflect the intentions of the designer but with little potential
      understanding of user needs. More importantly, it is now
      imperative to incorporate several cycles of iterative or usability
      evaluation during the design development phases in order to
      enhance quality. There are other more significant reasons why
      evaluation is necessary both during and after the design process:
      - Statutory health, safety and building standards have to be met.
      - A detailed understanding of product/environment use is
      required for design refinement.
      - General levels of performance need to be achieved due to
      commercial market forces from rival products.

      Every evaluation takes place within a definite context which
      includes:
      – The experience level of users
      – The types of tasks that have to be undertaken
      – The environment in which the product has to be used
      – The type of system or product that is being evaluated


      The User/Task/Environment/Product/System
      Approach
      Every single contextual component of evaluation also provides
      specific guidelines for developing similar range of products and
      pointers to avoiding mistakes that add up to poor design. These
      components are also the minutiae of teaching universal design
      thinking and to solving design problems for the greatest range and
      number of people. The generic checklists that emerge from consi-
      dering user requirements during the design stage and then at the
      evaluation stage are best exemplified by the following flexible and
      expandable checklist based on the above approach. Although syn-
      thesised from literally hundreds of practical evaluation protocols
      or checklists it is crucial that designers and teachers treat it as a
      guide rather than as something set in concrete. In other words –
      merely a tool for thinking rather than as a rigid formula.

      3 Editor’s note: Evaluation methods are also described in chapters 1.5,
        2.4, and 2.5.
                 Jim Sandhu
   Inclusive Design Research   Multi-Dimensional Evaluation as a Tool in Teaching Universal Design   109
                         UK




A. The User                         What are the characteristics of the user?
                   Age
                   Sex
                   Diagnosis
                   Mental state/Learning abilities
                   Functional limitations:
                   e.g.    strength in limbs
                           coordination of movement in limbs
                           hand and spinal function
                           absence of limbs
                           endurance/energy
                           trunk stability when standing/sitting
                           sight
                           hearing
                           speech
                           psychological problems:
                                             confusion
                                             poor memory
                           Other people involved in use of product:
                                             to install
                                             maintain
                                             clean
                                             repair

                    Some further questions:
                    Children:           Can the product be used by them? Should it?
                    Handedness:         Has suitable compromise been made between
                                        requirements of the 90% right-handed users and the
                                        10% who are left- handed.
                    Anthropometrics: Is product/environment usable by:
                                        a) women in advanced stages of pregnancy?
                                        b) fat persons
                                        c) extremely tall persons
                                        d) extremely short persons

B. TheTask:        What tasks should be achieved with the product/building/system?
                   What actions are required to carry them out?
                   What skills are required to carry out the tasks?
                   What is the dynamic interaction between the user and the task; between
                   environment and the task?
                   What is the precise sequence of operation?
110                                                      UNIVERSAL design   Part 1 Europe




      C. The Environment:            In what conditions will the building/product be used?
                                     Under what physical conditions?
                                         acoustics
                                         moisture
                                         lighting
                                         heat
                                         vibrations, etc
                                    Would it have to be installed?
                                         in what conditions?
                                         to what materials?
                                         to what available spaces?
                                    Would it be used in conjunction with other equipment, furniture
                                    or structures?
                                    What would be their characteristics?
                                    What kind of social environment would the product/building be
                                    used in?
      D. The Product/Building       What is the product/building for?
      /System                       What features should it possess?
                                    For what activity is it intended?
                                    What are the principles for operating it?
                                    Where would it be used?
                                    Would it be used in combination with other products?
                                    Would it be used in combination with other systems?
                                    Would it need someone’s assistance? Whose?
                                    How frequently would it be used?
                                    How can the user obtain or access it?
                                    How can it be installed?
                                    How can it be maintained?
                                    How can it be cleaned?
                                    How can it be moved, assembled, or adjusted for use?

      In the context of evaluation all the above are components of usability which is an integral
      feature of universal design. The focus on usability puts the user at the hub of any design
      exercise. The ISO Draft International Standard (DIS) 9241-11 “Guidance on usability specifi-
      cation and measures” defines usability in the following way:
      • usability: the effectiveness, efficiency and satisfaction with which specific users achieve
        specified goals in particular environments;
      • effectiveness: the accuracy and completeness with which specified users can achieve
        specified goals in particular environments;
      • efficiency: the resources expended in relation to the accuracy and completeness of goals
        achieved;
      • satisfaction: the comfort and acceptability of the work system to its users and other people
        affected by its use.
                  Jim Sandhu
    Inclusive Design Research   Multi-Dimensional Evaluation as a Tool in Teaching Universal Design         111
                          UK




In the light of the author’s experience of carrying out validation exercises in the human
computer interfaces (HCI) domain and in view of the overlapping nature of design particu-
larly in the context of universal design it is possible to extend the components of evaluation
even further as exemplified by the following chart:

System Acceptability

                                                         Utility                       Easy to learn
         Social
         Acceptability                                   Usability                     Efficient to use
                                 Usefulness
                                                                                       Easy to remember
                                 Cost
System                                                                                 Few errors
Acceptability                    Compatibility
                                                                                       Subjectively
          Practical              Reliability                                           pleasing
         Acceptability
                                 Support                                               Configurable

                                Availability                                           Provides
                                                                                       feedback
                                 Flexibility

                                 Mobility

Standards
This far one of the most important components missing from the above overview is that of
standards and standardisation. The designer’s conformity to standards that uphold universal
design principles can enhance product/building quality and promote good practice.
Standards can also form a metric for evaluation as they are a process for establishing
common rules and characteristics of products, buildings and services to be used when
manufacturing, designing, building and selling products and services. Standards can also
provide a prescription or guidelines when initiating a new project and cover such topics as:
– buildings                                                – traffic safety
– ergonomics                                               – quality of internet services
– surface temperatures of electric appliances              – smart cards
– safety of household appliances                           – smart houses
– heating, cooking and ventilation
– garden equipment                                         Standards also cover services such as:
– safety of machinery                                      – measurement of quality of postal services
– lifts                                                    – terminology for tourism operators anf hotels
– child safety issues                                      – quality of public transport
112                         UNIVERSAL design   Part 1 Europe




      User Panels
      An integral and unique feature of SNRU’s evaluative work was
      the voluntary panel of disabled, older and ordinary testers first
      established by the author in 1981 for evaluation the Tyne &
      Wear Metro System which had just been opened. Over the past
      twenty years the panel varied from a core of 250 to just under
      1000 members. Starting exclusively with volunteers with a self-
      admitted disability or problems using components of their envi-
      ronment, considerable attention was paid to keeping the range
      of disabilities proportional to the national average as first estab-
      lished by the Unit for the Commission’s RACE Programme. It
      should be pointed out that this was not always possible. In the
      recent past more and more ordinary users have been added lar-
      gely due to the increasing knowledge and spread of universal
      design principles. Despite the problems of proportionality the
      size of the panel made sampling of various disabilities empiri-
      cally viable. However, it is interesting to note that when stu-
      dents were introduced to groups of volunteers one of their first
      observations had a common theme – that despite their social
      and economic differences which have tended to keep disabled
      and older people apart, many similarities in functional characte-
      ristics were evident in panel grouping. This was clearly the
      beginning of their hands-on universal design awareness. They
      learned more from this process of interaction than from lectures
      or studio work. (On average just over half the panel was over 60
      years old – a reflection of the burgeoning demographic shift,
      amongst others.)

      Sometimes the number and range of categories selected for a
      specific evaluation largely depended on the following:
      – conditions imposed by the contracting organisation, such as a
        request to concentrate on the visually impaired market sector
      – the nature of the product, e.g. specialised easy-to-wire plugs
        compared with gas or electric cookers which require more
        extensive and exhaustive data collection
      – the overall budget which dictated what could be achieved in a
        given timescale; the honoraria that could be afforded to pay
        the volunteers; the geographic and disability spread of the
        volunteers.


      Usability Issues
      Some of the theoretical issues were discussed earlier. In the
      practical context of the various evaluations the prime ‘teaching
              Jim Sandhu
Inclusive Design Research   Multi-Dimensional Evaluation as a Tool in Teaching Universal Design   113
                      UK



                            goal’ aside from satisfying contractor requirements, was to
                            learn from the panellists about their experiences with products
                            and environments. What design feature made the product work
                            for them? What features render a product/environment inacces-
                            sible? In the early 1980s the reason for this emphasis was that
                            traditionally, disabled and especially older consumers had not
                            been the subjects of market research. There were very few
                            studies describing usability from their perspective. It was also a
                            reflection of the fact that a large proportion of users with spe-
                            cial needs made do with ‘ordinary’ products to the best of their
                            abilities. To some extent this is true of mainstream society today
                            as it goes about making the most of poor design.


                            Typologies, Taxonomies and Design
                            Morphology
                            Contractually, the main goal of the evaluations was to establish
                            some sort of a usability metric for the product/environment and
                            to provide feedback to the client for further refinement. This
                            feedback was based on the analysis of an evaluation protocol –
                            a set of questions very much focused on the actual use of the
                            product/environment. These protocols ranged from thirty-five
                            A4 pages for cookers; fifty pages to evaluate access to a univer-
                            sity to just three pages to evaluate screwless plugs. Severally
                            and jointly with the research Institute for Consumer Affairs
                            (RICA) and others over 500 pages of questions (or checklists)
                            have been developed covering a range of generic products and
                            environments.

                            The fact that the protocols emerged from establishing the typo-
                            logies, taxonomies and relationships centred on the specific
                            product/environment being evaluated holds great promise to the
                            evolution of universal design. The methodology is a solid con-
                            tribution both to establishing a design morphology and as a tea-
                            ching/analysing/awareness raising tool. It is also a major help to
                            establishing generic guidelines and to evolving meta-rules for
                            clarifying functional specifications.

                            Example 1
                            Perhaps the simplest example of the above approach which
                            highlights the factors affecting the successful use of a product
                            or environment is given below in Figure 1. Due to weighting of
                            the three main elements shown and the ever changing circum-
                            stances at any time, it has to be assumed that the three rings are
114                           UNIVERSAL design   Part 1 Europe




      in a constant state of flux and subject to centripetal and centri-
      fugal forces. The greater the parallax in the centre the more
      successful the product in use.


                                Steps/Actions
                                Needed fo Use


                                    Level of
          Extent of                 Success                 Extent of
           Universal Design         in Use             Physical/Mental
            Principles                           Impairments of Users
              Incorporated




      Example 2
      The following is a simple example of the generic process of
      establishing user tasks when testing a new product/environ-
      ment. It is a prerequisite to the more detailed processes that
      follow, which in turn lead to the final protocol or checklist. This
      table is focused on the evaluation of the whole range of micro-
      wave cookers. But it could equally apply to any other product,
      system or environment:

      Establishing User Tasks
      Task sequence involves three main areas of operation
        Loading; Programming; Unloading
      Task sequence can involve the following action
        Grasping; Lifting; Pulling; Pushing; Turning
      The standard sequence of operation is
        Opening door; Placing an object in the cavity; Closing the
        door; Setting programme; Starting programme; Switching
        off; Opening door; Removing object/utensil; Closing door;
        Cleaning any spillages
      Factors considered in arriving at overall evaluation
        Overall ease of use within each separate task; Comfort of the
        user whilst using appliance; Ease of understanding instruc-
        tions; Effort required to carry out each individual task;
        Absence of any sharp edges or dangerous components eg
        safety; Ease of cleaning; Audibility of signals, timer, etc.
        Colours, contrasts, lettering, light, etc.
              Jim Sandhu
Inclusive Design Research   Multi-Dimensional Evaluation as a Tool in Teaching Universal Design                     115
                      UK



                            Example 3
                            As the next step in the process, the following figure highlights
                            the microwave cooker taxonomy in terms of the different key
                            components and their logical relationship. The figure also intro-
                            duces the concept of clustering components that belong to-
                            gether and the concepts of main and sub-categories.



                              Documentation

                             Door Release                Within the Cavity                 Facilities
                             – Dual Action               – Turntable                       – Grilling
                             – Push Button               – Turntable Housing               – Browning
                             – Pull                      – Fan                             – Auto Defrost
                             Doors                       – Glass Tray                      – Memory
                             – Side Opening              – Rotating Antenna                – Combination Cooking
                             – Drop Down                 – Shelving                        – Halogen
                             – Other                     – Self-Cleaning Walls
                                                         – Other Equipment


                                                         Control Panel                     Displays and Labelling
                                                         – Size                            – Visual Feedback
                                                         – Shape                           – Audible Feedback
                                                         – Position                        – Tactile Feedback
                                                         Type of Controls
                                                         – Rotary
                                                                                           Auto Facilities
                                                         – Touch Pad
                                                                                           – Digital
                                                         – Touch Sensitive
                                                                                           – Analogue
                                                         – Colour Contrast
                                                                                           – Simple Mechanical
                                                         – Visual Feedback
                                                         – Audible Feedback
                                                         – Tactile Feedback




                            Example 4
                            The evaluation procedures described this far can also be used to
                            assess the suitability of all the components in a house for diffe-
                            rent types of impairments as shown over the next two pages:
Restrictions              dependant on helpers,      restricted movement of       restricted directed         none or very            sight problems or          none or very basic      Restricted movement        severe hearing & spe-
                            restricted mobility       head, rising, bending,      handling & finger       restricted mobility of          blindness            co-ordination, abrupt        in upper limbs               ech defects           116
Problem                                                 grasping, turning,              control              the upper body                                         movements,
area or object                                               kneeling                                                                                           balancing problems
Dishwasher                No particular problem      Problems opening &         No special problems      Generally incapable of    Plugging in & opening      Generally regarded as     Difficulties opening &      Cannot establish when
                          except minor difficult-    closing the door, for      only some small non-     using a dishwasher        switch, difficult to       a problem, without        closing the door; diffi-    machine is running &
                          ies eg.that of opening     some this is impossible    specified difficulties                             read, impossible to        considering individual    culties reaching the        when corresponding
                          the machine                because of their r                                                            know if on or not;         elements                  back of the machine;        cycle is ended
                                                     estrictions                                                                   cannot see inside the                                difficulties putting in
                                                                                                                                   machine                                              special salt
Windows                   Difficulties cleaning      Impossible to clean      No problems                General difficulties      Cannot see whether it      Restrictions prevents     Cannot reach window No special problems
                          windows particularly       windows; difficulties                               preventing opening;       is clean & without stre-   cleaning by oneself;      in order to clean it; im-
                          because of height          opening, closing & loo-                             closing & cleaning;       aks; fear of leaning out   extreme problems          possible to clean out-
                                                     king out; difficulties                              difficulties getting at   window when cleaning       opening & closing         side; opening & closing
                                                     opening/closing                                     curtains & closing                                   window                    too difficult; difficulties
                                                     curtains; fear that they                            windows                                                                        getting near window
                                                     may fall out low                                                                                                                   with wheelchair; limi-
                                                     windows                                                                                                                            ted view
Floor covering            Difficulties cleaning                                 No problems              Carpets make wheel-       Cannot recognise           Problems cleaning par-    Carpets cause friction;     No problems; small
                          floors; mobility im-pai-   Problems turning; clea-                             chair movement more       whether cleaning is        ticularly with dust pan   loose edges are diffi-      bother with cleaning
                          red by deep pile car-      ning; things breaking                               difficult; because of     necessary & when           & especially with loose   cult to negotiate;
                          pets; loose rugs are a     on hard floors when                                 disability they cannot    clean, whether it is       lying carpets             vacuum cleaner diffi-
                          greater danger             they fall                                           clean                     clean or not                                         cult to handle;flat slip-
                                                                                                                                                                                        pery surfaces are
                                                                                                                                                                                        particularly dangerous
                                                                                                                                                                                        for old or threadbare
                                                                                                                                                                                        wheels
Bath                      Problem getting in or                                 Small difficulties;      Bath too low & slippery Balancing problems      Difficulties getting in or     Often restrictions pre-     Cannot hear when
                          out; difficulties          Need basic help; sides     some demand help                                 when using & cleaning; out; cannot reach in to         vents person from           water is running or
                          reaching for cleaning      too low - danger of                                                         does not know when      clean it                       using bath; difficulties    overflowing
                          purposes                   slipping, too hard;                                                         clean; cleaning sub-                                   getting from chair into
                                                     danger of falling                                                           stance changes feeling;                                bath; difficulties
                                                                                                                                 slippery; sides too low                                reaching fixtures
Rubbish container         Problems transporting      Problem of transport-      No problems              Some cannot, others       Some demand shorter        Transport problem,        Access with wheelchair No problems
                          rubbish outside; diffi-    ing rubbish; rubbish                                have no problem           routes to rubbish          emptying as well as       not possible; cannot
                          culties emptying rub-      container difficult to                                                        container                  reaching the rubbish      take rubbish out; rub-
                          bish into container        access.                                                                                                  container                 bish container too high
Bed                       Making beds is             Problem making bed as No problems                   No room to move           No problems                Changing bed-linen is     Cannot make bed; no         No problems
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               UNIVERSAL design




                          problematic                well as getting in or                               around bed, cannot                                   a problem                 way around it; bed too
                                                     out                                                 make bed                                                                       high for wheelchair
WC (toilet)               Problem sitting down       Restrictions prevents      No problems              WC too near side wall     No general problems;       WC too small; space       Seat too low; move-         Cannot hear toilet; fear
                          & standing up              independent usage;                                  space for wheelchair      very often WC too          for manoveuring           ment difficult; problem     of overflowing when
                                                     seat too low; cannot                                too small                 small                                                closing door from           they are blocked
                                                     reach handle                                                                                                                       inside, cannot get near
                                                                                                                                                                                        enough
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Part 1 Europe




Built-in (walk-in) cup-   Insufficient space;        Shelves & hangers too      No problems              Shelves too high, insuf- Doors difficult to          Stretching, too little    Opening too narrow,    No problems
boards                    shelf too difficult to     high; space too small;                              ficient space            handle                      space, jamming of sli-    cannot get at things
                          reach                      no light; no view; no                                                                                    ding doors                high up or low down,
                                                     storage space for bro-                                                                                                             clothes rack too high,
                                                     oms, luggage                                                                                                                       cannot get near enough
                                                                                                                                                                                        with wheelchair
Shower                    Problems standing,         Cannot get in or out,      No problems              Too small for standing    Fixtures too low, diffi-  Problems moving, stan-     Cannot use fixed sho-       No problems
                          nothing to hold on,        fixtures difficult to                               & probably for helper     cult to grasp dial, soap- ding up, standing and      wer, needs help
                          fear of falling & slip-    reach, space too nar-                               as well, jamming sli-     holder & other things     shower controls            moving, difficulties
                          ping                       row for 2 people if hel-                            ding doors difficult to   too difficult to find                                reaching fixtures
                                                     per required, slippery                              manage
Problem area or object   dependant on helpers,     restricted movement of        restricted directed     none or very restricted      sight problems or      none or very basic co-    Restricted movement         severe hearing &
                           restricted mobility      head, rising, bending,       handling & finger        mobility of the upper           blindness           ordination, abrupt          in upper limbs            speech defects
                                                      grasping, turning,               control                    body                                       movements, balancing
                                                           kneeling                                                                                                problems
Light                    Problem changing          Wrongly & badly loca- Cannot change bulbs             Switch too high, too      High lights dazzle -      Cannot change bulbs,     Switch difficult to       No problems
                         ceiling light-bulbs,      ted switches & sockets,                               difficult to reach, too   unpleasant, placing of    problems using light     reach, switch too high,
                         generally too few &       cannot change bulbs                                   few switches              switches in different     switch                   too difficult to use.
                         badly placed switches                                                                                     places causes one not                              Cannot change bulb
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 UK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Inclusive Design Research
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Jim Sandhu




                                                                                                                                   to know whether light
                                                                                                                                   is on/off, need non-
                                                                                                                                   dazzle light or high
                                                                                                                                   concentration of light
Wall sockets &           Difficult to reach/ no    Too low, too little,       Problems with some.        Socket behind furniture   Too few sockets, too    Range & accessibility      Position of sockets out   Problem with all audio
electrical appliances    problem                   problems with plug-                                   or in inaccessible cor-   deep or badly placed,                              of reach, cannot reach    signals, door bells etc.
                                                   ging in & taking out                                  ners, problem with        so that they are behind                            wall behind work area
                                                                                                         plugging in taking out    or between furniture
Wash basins              Must be able to sit,      Cannot get close           No problems                Basin too high, too    No general problems          No general problems,     Problems reaching fix-    No problems
                         cannot get beneath        enough to or underne-                                 deep. Cannot get close                              have to be able to sit   tures and turning taps.
                         basin with wheelchair     ath fittings, gets wet                                to basin due to wheel-                              down
                                                   underneath basin                                      chair.
Bedroom                  Too small, bad shelving Too small cannot get at No problems                     Too small, wants also   No problems.                Too small , no shelf     Problems with switches Better light, signal
                         & too small dressing    light, curtain, window,                                 to carry out work from                              space                    and TV controls.       light, alarm
                         space                   T.V., radio etc. from bed                               bed, open/close curtain
                                                                                                         from bed
Maintenance              Only needs help for       Needs help with shop-      Needs help for difficult   Needs help.               Requires help with        Small problems, hot      Only some help            Needs no help if equip-
                         some manual jobs &        ping, problems with        jobs & with cleaning                                 shopping, difficulties    meals not always pos-    required with strenu-     ment has light/sound
                         shopping                  mealtimes                  jobs                                                 with reading recipes      sible                    ous shopping & jobs       signal systems
Housekeeping             Periodic help for clea-   Daily help essential for   Periodic help for diffi-   Help once a week with     Now & again needs         Problems with infre-     Needs help with clea-     No help required
                         ning & washing            cleaning, making beds,     cult cleaning jobs         cleaning & washing        help for cleaning &       quent big cleaning       ning, bed making &
                                                   washing etc.                                                                    washing, as well as for   jobs, chang-ing bed-     washing but not daily
                                                                                                                                   paying bills              linen, doing washing
Personal Hygiene         No help                   Help with bathing,         Now & again for mani-      Help with dressing, un- No help                     No help                  Some are dependent        No help
                                                   dressing, undressing,      cures or getting hair      dressing, bathing,                                                           on help, particularly for
                                                   going to the toilet, to    done etc.                  going to the toilet etc.                                                     bathing & dressing
                                                   bed etc.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Multi-Dimensional Evaluation as a Tool in Teaching Universal Design




Fridge/Freezer           Problems reaching         Needs help.                Needs help.                Needs help                Needs some help.          Needs help.              Needs help.               No help
                         higher shelves.
Microwaves               No problems if within     Needs help                 Needs help.                Needs help.               Needs occasional help.    Needs help               Needs help.               No help.
                         reach.
Cookers                  Restrictions due to       Needs help.                Needs help.                Needs help.               Needs help.               Major problem.           Needs help.               No help.
                         wheelchair.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   117
118                                                             UNIVERSAL design      Part 1 Europe




                                    Example 5
                                    The following example highlights a procedure for carrying out
                                    an access audit or evaluation extensively used by the author and
                                    his team over many years. The brief was to assess all the univer-
                                    sity buildings for full accessibility. The numbers in the final
                                    column rank (RK) the order of priority from 1 to 3, with 1 stan-
                                    ding for immediate action to tackle problem areas. However,
                                    these are seriously embedded in reality – in full knowledge of
                                    the budgets available. So the ranking takes into consideration
                                    the fact that installing a vertical lift would not be feasible in the
                                    immediate future.



      Site: City Campus, Main Facility: Ellison Building

       SUB AREAS                    OBSERVATIONS                       REMARKS/SUGGESTIONS                     RK
       Block ‘A’ basement           Access via staircase               Install stairlift or vertical lift       3
       Block ‘A’ doors              2 sets of heavy double doors       Adjust opening force & speed            1
                                    in corridor
       Block ‘B’ approach to main   3 steps to main double doors tl Dropped kerb need to be installed.
       entrance                     o the right of large flat leve  Initiate parking restriction around kerb   1

       Upper floors in Block ‘B’    2nd floor access restricted to     A ramp needs to be installed            1
                                    the right from the lift due to a
                                    single step
       South entrance toBlock ‘C’   Single step to double doors     Dropped kerb required for step.
                                    No footpath leading to entrance Double doors repositioned for
                                                                    safe entry                                 3
       Upper floors in Block ‘C’    No access to wheelchairs           Subject to budget install lift          3
                                    no lift
       Main entrance Block ‘D’      Level access to main               Door opening force & speeds             1
                                    corridor via double doors
                                    to be checked
       Main entrance Block ‘E’      Small step to double doors         Dropped kerb or minor ramp needed       2
                                    6 steps rising to main corridor
                                    Level. Mat well in foyer.
                                    Level Access to lifts.
       Refectory goods Entrance     Ramped walkway along the           Alternative access to building but
                                    side of Ellison Building leading   not recommended as access route.
                                    to a ramp into the goods
                                    delivery depot.
                Jim Sandhu
  Inclusive Design Research   Multi-Dimensional Evaluation as a Tool in Teaching Universal Design                     119
                        UK



                              Example 6
                              An important step in the act of designing, and therefore central
                              to universal design, is the formulation of a prescription or
                              model for a finished work in advance of its embodiment. This
                              process applies to every activity which involves designing – in
                              this example, the design of a complex interactive computer sys-
                              tem targeted at providing up-to-date and ‘real time’ information
                              to travellers. (Further information can be obtained from the
                              websites www.prosoma.lu/turtle and www.tag.co.uk/turtle ).
                              The example focuses on the mechanism for clarifying the com-
                              plex inter-relationship of the various elements that combine at
                              different levels to result in a viable electronic information sys-
                              tem. As can be seen there are many generic elements common
                              to many of the previous examples in terms of tackling universal
                              design problems.



                 Elements of a Taxonomy of Transport Information Tools

                MEDIA                                                       HARDWARE INTERFACE
                Text                                                        Interface Devices
                Data                                                        Input Devices
                Image                                                       Output Devices
                Audio                                                       Networks
                Video

                                                                                                    FUNCTIONALITY
SOFTWARE INTERFACE                                                                                  Conversational
Dialogue Type/Style                  TRANSPORT                                                      Messaging
Display Format                       INFORMATION TOOL                                               Retrieval
Directivity                          BUNDLES                                                        Integration
Control of Errors                                                                                   Document Production
Coding/Abbreviation                                                                                 Storage
Help                                                                                                Manipulation
                                                     OPERATING CHARACTERISTICS
Flexibility/Adaptability
                                                     Clarity
                                                     Capacity
                                                     Facilities
             MODALITY                                Speed
             Vision                                  Response Time
             Hearing                                 Reliability
             Touch                                   Networking
             Cognition                               Inter-relationship
                                                     Harmonisation
                                                     Transferability
                                                     Complementary
120                                                                    UNIVERSAL design          Part 1 Europe




                                             Example 7
                                             An important component of the above project was to provide
                                             complementary and seamless information to all users of the Tyne
                                             and Wear Metro – including pictures and problems areas for each
                                             station (which can be seen on the above websites). The methods
                                             of gathering data or information, and of carrying out surveys or
                                             audits contribute directly to the morphology of universal design.
                                             The following audit protocol is one of seven used since 1981.

      Tyne & Wear Metro Evaluation & Access Audit
       General Information
       Name of station                                   Other information         • No. of entrances
       Location                                                                    • Suitable station to visit City Centre/Coast etc.
       Date of survey                                                              • Is it suitable for disabled people to use?
       Number of platforms         • platform number
                                   • direction

       Access Information
       Ramps                           • handrails                                    •   floor surface texture
                                       • gradient                                     •   length
       Access between platforms        • between all available platforms              •   lifts
                                       • the route                                    •   handrails
                                       • footbridges                                  •   resting points
                                       • steps                                        •   signage
                                       • ramps                                        •   reflective markings for guidance
                                       • subways                                      •   textured surfaces
                                       • kerbs                                        •   surface quality
                                       • dropped kerbs                                •   distance to travel
                                       • escalators                                   •   barriers
                                       • overhanging shrubbery                        •   suitable pavement for wheelchair user
       Access onto Platforms           Consider: as above
       Access onto the Metrocar        Consider: as above, plus
                                       • platform edge                                • gap between metrocar & platform (fixed)
       Access Routes to Station        Consider: as above, plus
       Automatic Station Doors         • location                                     • floor surface texture
                                       • suitability for visually impaired users      • signage
       Disabled Parking                • no. of spaces                                • signage
                                       • location
       Escalators                      Consider: as for steps, plus                   • suitability for disabled people
       Help point                      • manned                                       • suitability for disabled people
                                       • location
       Lifts                           • operation                                    • signage
                                       • suitability for visually impaired users      • suitability for wheelchair users
       Parking                         • no. of spaces                                • signage
                                       • location
       Personal Assistance Available   • number of people                             • how to get attention
                                       • hours of availability
       Steps                           • number                                       • handrails
                                       • height                                         ➩ colour
                                       • depth                                          ➩ grip
                                       • reflective markings
       Tactile Edge Markers            • location                                     • nature
                                       • colour                                         ➩ raised bumps, spongy rubber
       Ticket Barrier                  • location                                     • colour
                                       • nature                                       • signage
                                         ➩ automatic, swing etc.                      • operation
                                       • manned
       Other Information               • Anything not previously mentioned
                      Jim Sandhu
        Inclusive Design Research   Multi-Dimensional Evaluation as a Tool in Teaching Universal Design                       121
                              UK




Facilities At The Station
Automatic Train announcements       • nature of announcement
                                      ➩ visual
                                           ◊ location
                                           ◊ colour
                                      ➩ audible
                                           ◊ male or female voice
                                           ◊ suitability for hearing impaired
Closed circuit television           • availability
Emergency stop button               • location                                    • suitability for disabled people
                                    • colour                                      • operation
Information Panel                   • availability                                • suitability for visually impaired users
                                    • suitability for reading disabilities
Lifts                               • operation                                   • signage
                                    • suitability for visually impaired users     • suitability for wheelchair users
Luggage Storage Area                • signage                                     • location
Public Address System               • availability
                                      ➩ visual
                                           ◊ location
                                           ◊ colour
                                      ➩ audible
                                           ◊ male or female voice
                                           ◊ suitability for hearing impaired
Resting points                      • seating                                     •   location
                                    • non-obstructive place to stop wheelchair    •   signage
Seating available on platform       • colour                                      •   number
                                    • height                                      •   nature e.g. flip-seat
                                    • location
Shelter available on platforms      • distance from entrances or other shelters   • full cover
                                                                                  • partial
Signage Details                     • signs within station                        • signs for disabled access
                                    • signs to platforms                          ➩ colour
                                                                                  ➩ icons
                                                                                  ➩ location
                                                                                  ➩ conspicuosness
Ticket machines                     • location                                    • suitability of operation for disabled
                                                                                    people
Timetable Information               • availability                                • suitability for visually impaired
                                                                                  • suitability for reading disabilities
Toilets                             •   location                                  • signage
                                    •   number                                    • opening hours
                                    •   accessible toilets
Transfare Information               •   availability                              •   suitability for visually impaired
                                                                                  •   suitability for reading disabilities
Travel Centre                       •   availability                              •   signage
                                    •   opening hours                             •   location
                                    •   accessibility
TURTLE Terminal                     •   availability
Other Information                   •   anything not previously mentioned
122                            UNIVERSAL design      Part 1 Europe




      Other Facilities At The Station Or Nearby

       Airport                    • location

       Bus Station                • location

       Bus Stop                   • location

       Cafeteria                  • accessibility
                                  • location
                                  • opening hours

       Civic Centre               • location

       Cigarette Machine          • location
                                  • accessibility

       Confectionery Machine      • location
                                  • accessibility

       Hospital                   • location

       Hospital with A & E        • location

       Newsagent                  • accessibility
                                  • location
                                  • opening hours

       Park & Ride Facility       • location

       Photo Booth                • location

       Post Box                   • location

       Post Office                • accessibility
                                  • location
                                  • opening hours

       Public House               • accessibility
                                  • location
                                  • opening hours

       Taxi Rank                  • location
                                  • signage

       Telephone                  • cash
                                  • card
                                  • induction loop
                                  • accessibility

       Train Station              • location
                                  • signage

       Other Information          • anything not previously mentioned
              Jim Sandhu
Inclusive Design Research   Multi-Dimensional Evaluation as a Tool in Teaching Universal Design   123
                      UK



                            Example 8
                            This final example highlights that the most important element
                            in teaching universal design is that of relatedness – how various
                            relationships and dependencies impact on the problem to be
                            solved. On the whole designers tend to have a narrow focus
                            dictated by their profession and training. The reality is that
                            many of the problems faced by the world are multi-dimensio-
                            nal: pollution, the environment, poverty, poor housing, sanita-
                            tion, unemployment, etc. However, the institutions that are
                            meant to solve these problems – government, science, edu-
                            cation, the professions – are not multi-dimensional. Each has a
                            particular focus and remit. Design and especially universal
                            design can play an important role in turning policies into tan-
                            gible ideas and concepts to change the way people think and
                            act. A prerequisite of this process is not only that designers
                            understand the role of other disciplines but also the complex
                            matrix of service providers and policy makers. This under-
                            standing lies at the hub of universal design evolution.
124                        UNIVERSAL design   Part 1 Europe




      In a sense the above paragraph really focuses on the concept of
      convergence which provides an opportunity to deal in a cohe-
      rent and comprehensive way with the whole series of previously
      disparate accessibility issues. Convergence is particularly being
      driven by the fast developing new technologies.

      The diagram below highlights the various bureaucracies and
      their relationships and how they can impact on an individual
      and very often enmesh them.


      Conclusions
      • It is clear that teaching Universal Design is not an easy task.
        It requires the broad vision that only comes with experience.
        It definitely requires a great deal of knowledge tempered by
        wisdom.
      • Designers can bring about far greater change in society
        through the judicious application of their Universal Design
        know-how than any other means such as politics or legis-
        lation.
      • Awareness of systematic methods for analysing problems
        and for carrying out evaluations at every stage of the design
        process is critical to universal design practice.
      • Evaluation dictates that user issues rather than technical con-
        siderations are central; to the design process.
      • It is important to focus on user task analysis so that users’
        needs are well understood.
      • Task analysis needs to be done in addition to general require-
        ments analysis, which tends to focus on what functionality is
        required and not on how to provide that functionality.
      • It is crucial to design iteratively with many cycles of proto-
        typing/testing/redesign. The designer should aim to add
        value with each stage.
      • Multi-dimensional thinking, convergence and seamlessness
        should figure writ-large in any course teaching universal
        design.
              Jim Sandhu
Inclusive Design Research   Multi-Dimensional Evaluation as a Tool in Teaching Universal Design   125
                      UK



                            References
                            Sandhu, J.S. An integrated approach to universal design:
                              Towards the inclusion of all ages, cultures and diversity. In
                              Universal Design Handbook. Eds. W. Preiser and E. Ostroff,
                              McGraw-Hill, USA. 2001.

                            Sandhu, J.S. Ageing, Citizenship and Universal Design.
                              Keynote Speech, International Federation on Ageing,
                              Montreal. 1999.

                            Sandhu, J.S. What is Design-for-All? In European Telematics:
                              Advancing the Information Society. TAP Conference,
                              Barcelona. 1998.

                            Sandhu, J.S. A Holistic Approach to the Design-for-All
                              Concept., European Institute for Design and Disability,
                              Newsletter No. 2. 1995.

                            Weisman, L.K. Towards an Architecture of Inclusion. Outreach
                             ACSA Women’s Issues Newsletter, Oct.1994.

                            Sandhu, J.S. Demography and Market Sector Analysis of People
                              with Special Needs in Thirteen European Countries: A report
                              on telecommunication usability issues. European
                              Commission’s RACE TUDOR Project. 1991.
126   UNIVERSAL design   Part 1 Europe




                                         Photo: FotoKnutsen AS
          Andrew Walker
United Kingdom Institute    Developments Towards Inclusive Design Teaching                        127
 for Inclusive Design, UK




                            1.6 Developments
                            Towards Inclusive
                            Design Teaching
                            Andrew Walker, AADipl, Grad Dipl (Cons)AA, United Kingdom
                            Institute for Inclusive Design


                            This chapter will examine the history, evolution and implemen-
                            tation of Inclusive Design Teaching at an institution known for
                            radical intervention, the Architectural Association (AA) in
                            London, UK.

                            Personal Route to setting up the course
                            It is important I believe, however briefly, to preface my own
                            reasons for entering this sphere of education as there are as
                            many routes to it as practitioners and this must colour the
                            manner in which the subject is developed.

                            I came into it truly by accident having fallen through a roof, as I
                            had not been taking care whilst measuring a building. In a
                            moment I became a wheelchair user. It was fortunate that I had
                            trained as an architect and was at the time a part time tutor at
                            the Architectural Association School in London. After half a
                            year in a spinal unit it was possible to return to continue wor-
                            king there and to become a full time staff member with the
                            agreement of the then lively and controversial Chair of the
                            School, Alvin Boyasky. There was to be no problem with access
                            around the building, it was explained, as the staff from the
                            maintenance department could lift me anywhere I wished to go.
                            The buildings form part of London’s finest Georgian square and
                            were built to suit sedan chairs with servants to move people
                            about and open doors. There was of course no lift and the idea
                            of one was not on the agenda in 1982. My office moved from
                            the top attic floor overlooking the Square to a room in the back.
                            After a year there I was made Head of Technical Studies and
                            held this position for thirteen years. Conditions remained primi-
                            tive but I was able to ask for a sink to cope with my sanitary
                            needs. I learnt that disabled people are very reliable – they can-
                            not go anywhere – students always knew I would be in my
128                         UNIVERSAL design   Part 1 Europe




      office and I would not be at the bar or out to lunch. But we are
      the lucky ones with jobs and meeting students every day keeps
      the brain awake and I was aware that many disabled people,
      even those now rich with “compensation” had a less happy fate.

      I was also fortunate in being asked to design a sports and reha-
      bilitation centre for the experimental London Spinal Unit.
      Again, briefly, I must explain that this also meant helping raise
      the money to fund it. Whilst I was honoured with the experi-
      ence it did mean a lot of work as part of a team and a lot of
      meeting and hand shaking of people on the charity circuit of
      those that come under the euphemism “the great and the good”.
      It was a fascinating experience which did produce a Centre of
      Excellence which was opened by the most popular of “Royals”
      but also still makes me shudder. It was obvious that these are
      the “special” people with their need for limousines, vestments,
      choirs, palaces, armies and of course – disabled people.
      Disabled people want to do the ordinary things like go out to
      the pub, go to the cinema, get an education, have work, sex and
      holidays and find somewhere an accessible lavatory. But what
      will the media do when we are no longer “special”. An army of
      professionals could completely disappear.

      With the sad death of Alvin Boyasky, a new head was elected
      by the School Community, Alan Balfour, a Scot who had been
      working in the United States. Excitingly the AA is one of the
      few institutions that elects its own head but beyond this, being
      there is a rather feudal experience. Our new Chair had experien-
      ced the Americans with Disabilities Act. He was rather surpri-
      sed to find that I had no access to a lavatory and that I still had
      to be helped in and out of the building.

      For a short period I had been doing part time work for what is cal-
      led, with British militaristic obsession, an Access “Officer” for a
      local authority. This proved fascinating to me, as it was a new world
      where people did not go on holiday but went “on leave” as though
      they were in the armed forces. (Much of our language is still milita-
      ristic; we still have «captains of industry». In design our prima
      donna architects still talk not of a strategy but of a «Master plan»
      and our master plans have to be “in line”.) Also I learnt that diffe-
      rent departments lived in their own Masonic worlds and did not like
      to speak with those in different departments, frightened that their
      own empires would fall and they might become redundant. As a
      curiosity in a wheelchair, I was able to get into any department
      because no one really knew what all this “access” stuff meant.
          Andrew Walker
United Kingdom Institute    Developments Towards Inclusive Design Teaching                       129
 for Inclusive Design, UK



                            The establishment of the Graduate
                            Diploma in Environmental Access
                            Suddenly with the new head of the AA, an opportunity came
                            about to get these non-speaking professions together with non-
                            disabled and disabled people together in a new graduate
                            diploma course taught on a day release basis for people at work.
                            (Building Conservation had had a similar course for years.)

                            The AA is a registered charity and School of Architecture foun-
                            ded over 150 years ago. Its foundation was not by some act of
                            Parliament or some beneficence by an aristocrat or industrialist
                            but astonishingly by a 25-year-old student. He felt dissatisfied
                            with the teaching he could get and wanted to prove that there
                            must be more to Architecture than just pattern books of Gothic
                            or Classic design. So he combined with others of like minds
                            and they met together and taught themselves. The School has
                            always encouraged students’ initiatives, ways of thinking and
                            problem solving which often become mainstream. So why not
                            invite disabled people to participate with professions who did
                            not really want to speak to one another to a graduate course in
                            an inaccessible, listed building and ask them to pay for the
                            privilege? It did seem a rather dubious proposition, but when I
                            hesitated the Access Officer for the City Corporation, Julie
                            Fleck – who also felt strongly about the idea – encouraged me
                            to “Just do it”. Since then I have advised dissatisfied users very
                            widely to do the same thing and see what happens.

                            It also meant that if we were inviting students into the building,
                            some of whom might be disabled, then there would have to be
                            proper parking, an accessible entrance, an accessible lavatory
                            and a lecture room with an induction loop: all the physical
                            things that any building should normally have anyway.

                            Julie Fleck and I had met some years earlier whilst I was invol-
                            ved as Hon Sec of the Access Officers’ Association in its inau-
                            gural year. We conferred with Jane Campbell then at Camden’s
                            Disability Research Centre who is now at the forefront of the
                            Independent Living movement in this country. It was agreed
                            that the proposals needed credibility with both disabled people
                            and design professions. The course would reject the medical
                            model and support the social model of disability. As a conse-
                            quence, Access was viewed as an environmental and not a
                            medical issue. We would advocate the end to people being
                            called “special” and consequently becoming the recipients of
130                        UNIVERSAL design   Part 1 Europe




      much bad design. We would support organisations “of ” dis-
      abled people rather than those “for” disabled people. The course
      would be a yearlong day-release course which would lead to a
      Graduate Diploma in Environmental Access.

      Whilst running Technical Studies at the AA, it was possible to
      have access to state of the art Consultants expert in such things
      as structure, environmental science and acoustics. The intention
      was now to introduce into the school experts in sound, sight,
      mobility and cognition – that is deaf, blind, ambulant disabled
      and learning-disabled people.

      This would be a disability lead initiative but there was always
      the belief that the issue was not just one for people with disa-
      bilities. The issue would be seen as one not of disability but of
      access. It was considered vital that it took its ethos from the
      noises being made by the disability movement and not from the
      professional establishments which were seen as being not pro-
      gressive. High standards of design, good management and clear
      information for people with disabilities would not leave out the
      majority of the population who are also all disabled by similar
      practices. It would be set within the context of civil rights and
      universal standards rather than philanthropy and special needs.
      Thus the debates and assignments on urban planning, public
      building, housing, transport, education and product, graphic
      and communication design would be encouraged to be seen
      from the perspective of inclusion with common standards rela-
      ted to emerging government programmes of social inclusion
      which were seen as both cost effective and a key element in the
      propagation of sustainability.

      An attempt was made to get the Access Committee for England
      to endorse the course but while being enthusiastic it said it
      could not endorse it. I went before the Royal Institute of British
      Architects’ Education and Professional Development
      Committee. Some of the members did not know what the dis-
      cussion was about. They too could not endorse the course but
      they did agree with the Royal Town Planning Institute, the
      Institute of Building Control, the College of Occupational
      Therapists and the Access Committee for England to “endorse
      this long over-due course initiative”.

      Opposition came from a leading architect, AA trained, who
      wrote to the Chair complaining he had been doing this stuff for
      years for disabled people and was well qualified, and if he had
          Andrew Walker
United Kingdom Institute    Developments Towards Inclusive Design Teaching                        131
 for Inclusive Design, UK



                            been doing it, it would be done properly and he should have
                            been consulted. The architect had missed the point, and it was
                            precisely for these reasons that I have avoided that advice.

                            “By Us” and not “For Us” should be their motto”, William Morris
                            had written in the Daily Chronicle of 1895 on the proposed eman-
                            cipation of the working classes. Whatever was done must come
                            from the bottom up; from the ignored experts who had to live with
                            the consequences of a disabling environment. These must be
                            encouraged to come into our highly prestigious institution with its
                            worldwide reputation and STUDY and TEACH!

                            It was necessary to create a leaflet to advertise the course. I
                            chose what I took to be a very beautiful photograph, but was
                            told that the photograph showed a pitiful image. It was of a
                            wheelchair-using friend of mine, taken whilst he was photogra-
                            phing a desolate scene in Bangladesh, where he was about to set
                            up a factory to teach disabled people to produce their own
                            wheelchairs from waste steel and rickshaw wheels. In this way they
                            would get a fine design to suit their own terrain and also become
                            independent of foreign charity. Hardly a pitiful image this.

                            Funding of the course was merely made under a small contin-
                            gency which the School gave me. One disabled student who
                            was helped by a bursary from a charity connected to a long-
                            standing member of staff. All attempts to get funding from the
                            charities of well known architectural firms failed.

                            The First Year of the Course
                            The School did get the changes to the building accomplished
                            ready for the first intake of students. The Chair greeted the stu-
                            dents with great hospitality and we began with hot coffee and
                            croissants served by a white coated AA Chef from the upstairs
                            bar. This is important, because as the bar was not accessible and
                            we did not wish to be discriminatory, it was policy to have
                            volunteers to bring refreshments down every so often so we
                            could be together in a group. The group was small. Eight people
                            to start with. Two planners, two architects, two access consul-
                            tants, an editor and a researcher. Three were disabled people. It
                            was very useful as one of the architects was deaf and required
                            an induction loop. We held the course around some tables and
                            had one person at a time speaking into the loop. This method
                            has been used ever since to discipline discussions. It also meant
                            our lecturers had to learn that discipline. Also we learnt to
132                         UNIVERSAL design   Part 1 Europe




      speak clearly and not to turn our faces away when speaking.
      Students were introduced to the library and the slide library.
      The AA has very fine collections in both. But it was decided
      that as neither were readily accessible, being on the first floor
      and basement. Our books and videos would be kept in the
      Access Office on the ground floor. This meant of course that
      the books in the main library and used by AA students were
      generally those which were very out of date – and still are.

      It was a prerequisite that all students had a common grounding
      in a disability awareness exercise which would cover the first
      two weeks of the course. This not only covered issues of lang-
      uage but also set the whole issue in the context of race, gender,
      class and women’s rights. After seeing a video of “Black people
      in the countryside” a student remarked that the long dresses do
      make people look odd in the country. She was asked whether
      this would apply also to Jane Austen? The awareness exercise
      was fundamental to all the work that followed and it is a vital
      ingredient in any such course. The pity was that it could not be
      done by all the staff of the School.

      In the 32 weeks of the day release course, students were expec-
      ted to complete three essays, several assignments and a thesis.
      Their coursework books notes would be examined together with
      any assignments with the thesis in an interview on the final day
      of the course. Two assessors were appointed: Geoffrey Darke,
      an architect now in private practice, a member of the Access
      Committee for England and Elspeth Morrison, former editor of
      Disability Arts in London (DAIL) who was then a producer for
      the Disability Programmes Unit at the BBC.

      In this first year coursework covered the polemic, disability
      awareness training, architecture, planning, product design,
      transport and the law. It looked at education buildings, housing,
      theatres, cinemas, stations, historic buildings etc. It brought into
      the school the major organisations dealing with the issue of
      Environmental Access. Visits were made to test transport and
      facilities in different parts of the country. Seminars were held
      with organisations such as People First, the national organisa-
      tion of people with learning difficulties.

      This last was to a degree to become the high point of the
      presentations as we were asked to write down key words and
      phrases used in our profession and then explain them in simple
      English to people with learning difficulties. It rapidly became
          Andrew Walker
United Kingdom Institute    Developments Towards Inclusive Design Teaching                               133
 for Inclusive Design, UK




                            Graduate course 1996 – disabling dog grids being tested by a blind person.



                            clear that it is this group of people who are the real experts in
                            communication skills. We learnt for example that someone may
                            be able to read but not understand symbols or even pictograms,
                            and so a wheelchair symbol on a door to indicate a lavatory
                            may just mean to them a room where there may be people in
                            wheelchairs; the label “toilet” needed to be added.

                            Students were instructed in access assessment. They had to do a
                            group assessment and one on their own of a building of their
                            choice. Generally these were illustrated documents with photo-
                            graphs and diagrams. The first exercise was important as it sho-
                            wed that, say, a blind person or wheelchair user can do as good
                            an assessment of a building, management practices and infor-
                            mation as anyone, provided appropriate assistance is in place.

                            The course did not generally indulge in simulation exercises.
                            The view was taken that pretending to be blind, deaf or unable
                            to walk can be as unrewarding as pretending to be a different
                            colour or gender. It can never be known but has to be believed.
                            One of the problems is that users’ views are not always credible
                            to professional people. We are expected to prove everything and
                            end up being measured and tested. For someone to suddenly
                            have to use a wheelchair can give a completely wrong impres-
                            sion of this non-walking way of life. Wheelchair skills have to
                            be learnt over time – a well-designed wheelchair enables. It
                            maintains independence and pride.
134                         UNIVERSAL design   Part 1 Europe




      One student was blind, and for his first essay he attached a
      camera to his head and filmed his journey in black and white
      around Waterloo Station from his – and his dog’s – view. A
      friend took a video of him doing this in colour. It proved a very
      effective way of illustrating the access, information and
      management shortcomings at this rail terminus. A copy was for-
      warded to the Minister of Transport for information.

      Some of the students had asked to be able to learn how to
      design, but an architect or designer has to take a long time to
      learn this skill, and the mixed background of the students
      worked against producing anything but simple designs.
      However, it was possible to teach all the students to be very
      good critics of design and of the management practices that are
      needed to create accessible environments.

      Exhibition and Evening Lectures
      In celebration of the establishment of the course, an exhibition
      of the work of the group “Motivation” and in particular the
      photographs and designs of David Constantine of
      “Wheelchairs in the Developing World” was held for three
      weeks. It was an opportunity not only to exhibit some excellent
      designs and processes but also to invite leading figures from the
      right, left and centre of politics. The earliest prototype which
      the designer had produced whilst a student and had been on a
      dump rusting away was rescued and repaired and put on its own
      pedestal. An induction loop was added to the main lecture hall.
      And a light weight ramp added to the main Georgian entrance
      in the Square which shocked the owners of the Square and
      delighted taxi drivers as they could identify as “that’s the
      School of Architecture with the ramp at the front and about
      time too...”

      The whole of the design process and the difficulties encounte-
      red in setting up self-sufficient production lines in Bangladesh,
      Poland and Cambodia was explained in the first of a series of
      lectures held with sign language interpreters in the lecture hall.

      On the same evening the Chairman launched an appeal for
      funds for a general passenger lift to link most of the levels of
      the school buildings and enable facilities to be used by all.

      So over a few weeks the following evening lectures, free to the
      public, were held:
          Andrew Walker
United Kingdom Institute    Developments Towards Inclusive Design Teaching                            135
 for Inclusive Design, UK



                            David Constantine:                  Motivation: the design of low cost
                                                                wheelchairs, using local materials
                                                                and local people in Bangladesh,
                                                                Poland and Cambodia.
                            Doug Alker:                         Sound Designs? – Architecture and
                                                                deaf people.
                            Professor Michael Oliver:           What’s so wonderful about
                                                                walking?
                            Jill Allen-King:                    Access needs of blind and partially
                                                                sighted people.
                            Rachel Hurst:                       The Taj Mahal or the Native Kraal
                                                                – an international perspective on
                                                                Access
                            Cedric Price:                       A concluding presentation

                            The exhibition and lectures were a success and gave the work
                            some credibility in the School and further afield. It enabled the
                            usefulness of the teaching to be recognised and it was now pos-
                            sible for Alan Balfour to start incorporating the work in the
                            mainstream teaching of the School. It became possible to take
                            the course into the First, Intermediate and Diploma levels.

                            The course was commented on by Mary Banham: “The densest
                            and most exciting course I have audited – and that amounts to
                            quite a few on two continents.” (AA Files Autumn 1993)

                            Infusing the Subject into the
                            Mainstream Curriculum
                            A pattern was developing that for a brief period enabled the
                            course to be infused into the mainstream teaching of the School
                            and also allowed the Graduate students and undergraduates to
                            be present together in this process. An Appendix giving the
                            Projects Review text of one year – 1997 – is added for informa-
                            tion.

                            Perceptions of Space – First Year
                            Early in their first year all students took part in a day’s presenta-
                            tion in a building – usually a theatre – which was undergoing
                            design and management changes to make it usable by all. These
                            building projects were all being funded by the Arts Council of
                            England National Lottery money which comes from any mem-
                            ber of the public buying a ticket. Therefore the projects had to
                            allow access in its fullest sense as part of the condition of fun-
                            ding for all people – including anyone with any disability. It
136                                                          UNIVERSAL design   Part 1 Europe




                                       seemed the greatest civil right given to disabled people had
                                       come inadvertently not by grand legislation but through gamb-
                                       ling! The funding related to the RIBA’s work stages so is an
                                       extremely practical system.

                                       Students were lectured by disabled people on different aspects
                                       of design relating to sight, sound, mobility and cognition. Issues
                                       of race and gender were included and the presentations took
                                       place at such venues as the Theatre of Black People and Grææ,
                                       the European Theatre of Disabled People, the Royal Festival
                                       Hall, the Battersea Arts Centre and Lux Cinema, Hoxton.
                                       Several firms of well-known and new firms of architects were
                                       happy to bring their projects to be scrutinised by young stu-
                                       dents. Students then had to present a submission relating to
                                       their own access needs, for example, their own auditorium.
                                       Students’ recognition of the social and technical issues raised
                                       thus informed a submission assessed in conjunction with
                                       requirements for Technical Studies. This served as an
                                       Introduction to the access issue for them and a basis for the
                                       teaching in the remaining five years.




      1st year perceptions of space, how do I communicate?
                  Andrew Walker
        United Kingdom Institute    Developments Towards Inclusive Design Teaching                     137
         for Inclusive Design, UK



                                    They were being taught from the start that the issue included
                                    them. This was quite difficult for some undergraduates to sto-
                                    mach. Some came from countries where disabled people are
                                    kept out of sight. One student said how horrified she had been
                                    to be lectured by disabled people but when she had to write her
                                    diary about her access needs she found that she was quite small
                                    and always had great difficulties coping with London buses and
                                    seeing above other people. Graduate students also participated.

                                    Second Year
                                    In the Second Year access became a technical requirement in
                                    terms of Technical Studies. Five half-day presentations by both
                                    non-disabled and disabled professional people relating to Sight,
                                    Sound, Spatial Perspectives, Cognition and Mobility were
                                    given. They took place in the AA or in buildings relevant to the
                                    presentation on Thursday afternoons.




2nd year playground – ts Roachford – wall & floor surfaces.
138                          UNIVERSAL design    Part 1 Europe




      Students were expected to fulfil attendant coursework and
      demonstrate how technical access issues modified a unit-based
      proposal in order to pass this component of their Second Year
      Technical Study. Work was assessed by Interim and final juries
      in the spring and summer terms of each student within a unit
      setting. For the first time all Intermediate School students now
      had a scheme design in their unit work that had had to be
      altered in some way to be inclusive.




      2nd years and graduate students 1996 project assessments.



      Third Year
      In this year Environmental Access now embraced the concerns
      of both Technical and General Studies. A series of seminars by
      leading practitioners discussed technical matters and the social
      polemic of access. With the co-operation of the General Studies
      and Technical Studies departments, a number of students had
      the opportunity at the beginning of the Spring term to enter a
      proposal relating to their unit design work, which could be con-
      sidered as a Technical or General Studies submission. Technical
      and General Studies Seminars took place on two afternoons per
      week. Following discussions between student and course tutors,
      students could be paired with a consultant to guide them in their
      work, perhaps advising further discussion with other specialists
      in the field. It was intended that selected work would then be
      presented to a jury comprising Technical and General Studies
      staff and members of the graduate Environmental Access
      course.
          Andrew Walker
United Kingdom Institute    Developments Towards Inclusive Design Teaching                                 139
 for Inclusive Design, UK




                            3rd year – king chong – communal housing – bed pods.

                            It was further intended that selected work be further presented for
                            selection for the Access Prize. This was to replace an Access Prize
                            which had previously been given by the Chair to the second year.




                                                                         2nd year workshop 1995 – Yanko
                                                                         Apostolov & Shibboleth Schecter
                                                                         – illuminated handrail to aid
                                                                         navigation and provide support.
140                        UNIVERSAL design   Part 1 Europe




      Diploma School Evening Lectures
      Evening lectures which were free and open to the public were
      held annually. Sign language interpreters were available on all
      occasions. They started off being under the title “Access,
      Architecture and Architects” and later “Inclusive Design”. They
      were held in the Spring Term and related to the social and tech-
      nical changes being brought about by the gradual emancipation
      of all sections of society. The lecture series hoped to show how
      broad the issue was and that it concerned all people. The inten-
      tion was that they could easily form the basis for study for
      Diploma School students.

      Outside Interest
      The evening lectures were always well attended but generally
      by people from outside the School. A designer from the USA
      broke his flight to come to one of them before going on to
      Poland. None of the presentations were ever published. This is
      sadly the pattern in most design schools were such work is pre-
      sented. A few students embrace the ideas with great interest and
      there is always interest from outside the institutions and glo-
      bally. Several educators visited the School to get advice on how
      to set up similar courses elsewhere and they have done so.
      So it is important to see this in a broader perspective. The
      Environmental Access Course had links with other access and
      design organisations promoting inclusive design including the
      European Institute for Design and Disability and organisations
      in North America.

      The Centre for Accessible Environments (formerly the Centre
      on Design for the Handicapped) has for many years been pro-
      ducing pamphlets and developing courses in user orientated
      design. Socially orientated courses were also held earlier than
      the AA – Greenwich University and later Leeds.

      Later courses sprang up in Belfast, Bristol, Dublin, Newcastle,
      Reading, Salford and Singapore. All these courses look at the
      issue from slightly different angles. They had been better fun-
      ded than the AA had been able to do and I do not think any
      attempted to integrate the subject within a five-year architectu-
      ral education system.

      The course had intended to get different professions on board
      and sometimes succeeded in this; however, some professions
      such as architecture were not as forthcoming as for instance
          Andrew Walker
United Kingdom Institute    Developments Towards Inclusive Design Teaching                         141
 for Inclusive Design, UK



                            occupational therapy. Possibly, although it is not possible to be
                            sure, the feeling was that architects did not need to be taught by
                            and alongside disabled people, whilst Occupational Therapy
                            liked the idea of being in a School of Architecture once a week.
                            But it was agreed that the course was not meeting its multi-cul-
                            tural idea whilst most of the students came from one discipline.
                            So it ceased to operate. Also it had always been very difficult to
                            get funding for students on the course at an independent school
                            of Architecture. This sadly meant that the only interventions
                            that could be made would have to be in the mainstream course
                            itself. The problem here was one of the buildings themselves,
                            which still did not have a lift and no proper access from the
                            front to the back of the building without being lifted. The buil-
                            dings are all historic and listed Grade I and are in London’s
                            finest Georgian Square, so changes to them are not easy to
                            contrive.

                            Inclusive Design
                            The British Institute for Design and Disability was founded at
                            the AA in 1995 and is one of a European network under the
                            umbrella of the European Institute for Design and Disability.
                            But the AA Prospectus was talking about inclusive design by
                            then, and mirrors the change of the British Institute to the
                            United Kingdom Institute for Inclusive Design (UKIID) in
                            1998 once the membership (half of which are disabled people)
                            was allowed to vote. The organisation was therefore taking
                            notice that it is not disability that is a problem but the disabling
                            nature of much design. (“Bad Environmental Design Disables
                            far more than any Medical Condition” – Elspeth Morrison AA
                            News Spring 1993.)

                            This philosophy was seen as the way forward and encouraged
                            membership from all sections of society (UKIID’s membership
                            doubled) interested in the notion that an inclusive society can-
                            not exist unless the design of the environment is also inclusive.
                            This principle was to seen apply to the design of buildings,
                            infrastructure, building and consumer products.

                            On June 2000 in London’s Docklands UKIID held the first con-
                            ference on Inclusive Design, which was attended by twelve
                            countries outside the UK. This was an opportunity to show the
                            positive efforts in this sphere in the United Kingdom and cove-
                            red regulations, domestic products, housing, transport and, fun-
                            damental to all, education. The 1995 Disability Discrimination
142                         UNIVERSAL design   Part 1 Europe




      Act and the extension to Part M or our Building Regulations to
      give a general accessible standard to all new housing is giving
      architectural practices a spur of an interest in a more rounded
      approach to design. Similar user orientated notions are influen-
      cing thinking at design schools.

      Last year Reading changed the name of its MSc from “Non-han-
      dicapping Environments” to “Inclusive Environments” and now,
      encouraged by former AA student Amanda Gibberd, the Pretoria
      School of Architecture is likely to introduce Inclusive Design.

      Proposed MA
      Now the School, under Mohsen Mostafavi, has asked that the
      subject is approached again and once again I have asked that an
      MA is introduced dealing with Inclusive Design. I have been
      pushing for this since 1996 and at last it may be possible to do
      it. Also the President of the Association, Nicholas Grimshaw,
      has pledged the Association to install a lift and make conside-
      rable alterations to make the buildings accessible. It will then be
      possible to teach on an equal footing and participate in the
      juries and activities of the school.

      Whilst a course can be established which fits into the mechanisms
      for the MAs currently provided in the School it means that it
      must, at a School of Architecture, include more than just debate
      and architectural propositions. It does mean that other professions
      will need to be there on such a course to instruct and be taught.

      This is very difficult for the profession to understand. It must
      practically relate to the users and be tested and it must be broad
      in scope and be constantly developing. Part of that development
      I hope will be with other institutions and also with the under-
      graduate school as there is a need to develop curricula which
      can be modified to the particular requirements of different
      schools of architecture and design. The issue is too important
      to be seen as just a specialist exercise but a fundamental change
      in the way design is taught at all levels.

      Society still remains largely ignorant of the needs of users. It
      must be acknowledged that certain non-disabled people have
      put much energy into reform of the system. But there are others
      eager to jump on the bandwagon in their professional capacity.
      They are well funded and well placed to get their organisation’s
      views across at gatherings across the globe. Only a few token
          Andrew Walker
United Kingdom Institute    Developments Towards Inclusive Design Teaching                        143
 for Inclusive Design, UK



                            disabled people manage to get funding to participate in such
                            decision-making exercises which are fundamental to change.
                            Civil Rights legislation would provide a move towards some
                            recognition of this problem but very little of this is in place.
                            And much of this is inadequate.

                            The paucity in numbers of disabled participants and graduates
                            in design education is only a reflection of the lack of integration
                            in society generally. Diversity is still considered a threat.
                            Curricula need to ensure that students will not have to pursue
                            their design education without coming into contact with those
                            for whom they are supposed to be designing.


                            Appendix 1
                            1997 Extract From AA School’s Annual
                            Projects Review
                            Complementary Studies
                            ENVIRONMENTAL ACCESS
                            This department co-ordinates the Environmental Access
                            Programme throughout the Graduate and Undergraduate
                            School. Awareness of societal and technical changes has encou-
                            raged the School to take an active part on this issue. The desire
                            is that the social and technical issues raised can be fed back into
                            the unit work. This is increasingly seen to be the case.

                            UNDERGRADUATE AND GRADUATE PROGRAMME
                            The AA set the Environmental Access Course, the first qualifi-
                            cation in this subject from any institution in January 1993. This
                            is its fourth year and again there was welcome participation
                            from architects from overseas. This work is now being develo-
                            ped in mainstream architectural teaching of the School and into
                            current social changes relating to disability, race, gender and
                            sustainability which must have an impact on design.

                            This year too there were offerings in the First, Second and Third
                            Years and an evening lecture series free and open to the public
                            and accessible to bring inclusive design to the widest possible
                            audience.

                            The principle aim is to bring together those involved in the
                            planning, design and implementation necessary to create an
                            environment accessible to all and so promote, in terms of
144                         UNIVERSAL design   Part 1 Europe




      architecture and design, a less hostile, more inclusive environ-
      ment. The course is designed to be multi-disciplinary as like
      architecture itself the Access Issue does not fit within the tight
      confines of a single profession. Integrated with this basic prin-
      ciple, people who are directly affected by a disabling environ-
      ment in terms of gender, race and disability are naturally
      included as students, educators and innovators.

      Course Requirements
      An essay is required by students in the first terms, followed by
      several audits in the second. These consisted of the pairing of
      the students to look at aspects of access within the AA – such as
      approach, horizontal and vertical access and measurements of
      sound and light, followed by a complete audit of a building of
      their choice. This work was assessed by the Programme
      Director. A thesis was completed in the third term and assessed
      together with notebooks and reports by the External Examiners.

      The Students
      This year most of the students were non-disabled people and
      mostly women. There were participants from Jersey and Japan.

      The Course
      AUTUMN TERM
      Week 1–2: Introduction and Induction Course
      Week 3:   All Day Event at IBM. Profit by Design
                Conference – First public meeting of the British
                Institute for Design and Disability.
      Week 4:   Do Deaf People Need Architects? and Participating
                Practices 1
      Week 5–6: Access needs of visually impaired people 1 and 2,
                Access to Information, Education Conference in
                Mainz, Site Visit (S. John’s Wood Adventure
                Playground), Participating Practices 2
      Week 7:   Perceptions of Space – all day event. Race, gender,
                sight, sound, mobility and cognition. Participating
                Practices 3, Access Proposals for Oval House
      Week 8:   Oval House – feedback. Hand in Essay 1.
                Discussion on thesis titles. Participating Practices 4
                – Access Proposals for the Royal Festival Hall and
                proposals for S. John’s Wood Adventure
      Week 9:   What Every Architect Should Know About
                Wheelchairs. Participating Practices 5 –
                Accommodating Diversity. Improving Access
                Through Consultation
          Andrew Walker
United Kingdom Institute    Developments Towards Inclusive Design Teaching                      145
 for Inclusive Design, UK



                            Week 10:      Assignment 1 – Hand In. Rôle of the Access
                                          Committee for England and the Access Officer. The
                                          Taxi You Told Us You Wanted – London Taxis
                                          International on the design of the world’s most
                                          advanced and user friendly taxi. Review of First
                                          Year Access Assignments and presentations by
                                          invited students

                            SPRING TERM
                            Week 1:       Access Needs of Ambulant Disabled. Australian
                                          Perspective. Design Questionnaire Feedback
                            Week 2:       The Art of Lying Down. The Big Issue; Accessible
                                          Housing. General Studies Third Year Option &
                                          Graduate Students Seminar. Disability & the Media
                            Week 3:       Assignment 2: Access Audit. Access Auditing,
                                          Building Regulations, Consultation. Technical
                                          Studies Seminar/Option: The Art of Lying Down &
                                          Do Deaf People Need Architects?
                            Week 4:       Barcelona Conference, Design for All. Civil Rights.
                                          Technical Studies Seminar
                            Week 5:       Products You Can & Cannot Use. Participating
                                          Practices 6. Students Seminar; Access to Historic
                                          Buildings 1. Technical Studies Seminar. Disability
                                          & the City
                            Week 6:       Public Transport to Your Front Door. Nothing to
                                          Fear? Trust & Respect in Urban Communities.
                                          Technical Studies Seminar. People and their
                                          Environments – Simon Richardson
                            Week 7:       What People See – Project Rainbow Colour &
                                          Contrast. Insurance Claims and Housing
                                          Assessments – Andrew Walker
                            Week 8:       All Day Visit – Greenwich via Canary Wharf & the
                                          Greenwich Tunnel, National Maritime Museum site
                                          visit to Nepture Hall Project with Keith Page of
                                          Bovis.
                            Week 9:       The Americans with Disabilities Act – Eight Years
                                          On. Access to Historic Buildings 2 Participating
                                          Practices 7 – Access to Historic Buildings 3 –
                                          Winchester Project and Portland College
                                          Competition
                            Week 10:      The Accessible Office. Design & Materials for
                                          Permanent & Temporary Ramps
                            Week 11:      All Day Visit to Coventry – The Accessible Factory
                                          Floor – London Taxis International with MD Jevon
                                          Thorpe & lunch
146                        UNIVERSAL design   Part 1 Europe




      SUMMER TERM
      Week 1:  Accessible Housing. Regent Square WC1 – access
               improvements? Accessible house on four levels.
      Week 3: Going it Alone, Housing without a grant. Housing
               Adaptations. Visit – Building Centre
      Week 4: Assignment 2 – Student presentations. The
               Redevelopment of Sadlers Wells – design, informa-
               tion & management practices – Judy Monahan with
               committee members
      Week 6: Transport – the implementation of radical change in
               the run up to the formation of the Greater London
               Authority. How Discrimination is Inherent in Design
      Week 7: Assignment 2 – Assessments. Access to Housing &
               Arts Venues, Measurement & Monitoring. Access to
               the Countryside 1
      Week 8: Access to the Countryside 2. National Trust and
               Access Policy. What is Tripscope – easy access to
               travel arrangements for anyone who has difficulty in
               getting about.
      Week 9: Thesis Submission. Railtack Strategy – Stations to
               suit passengers as well as management. Career
               Changes after the EA Course
      Week 10: All Day Visit: Richard Attenborough Centre,
               Leicester University
      Week 11: Interviews and Assessment of students’ work with
               examiners. Appraisal of EA course by students, and
               examiners

      In addition in the Summer Term, five evening lectures were
      held under the title Inclusive Design. They were free and open
      to the public, to publicise the notion of inclusive design. Sign
      language interpreters and an induction loop were available at all
      public lectures.

      Ian Taylor              Are you feeling comfortable? Issues in
                              Inclusive Design
      Ken Worpole             Does Inclusive mean Universal? –
                              Public Spaces and Public Goods
      Deirdre Candlin
      and Diane Haigh         Incremental Access at the Royal
                              Festival Hall
      Rob Imrie               Beyond the Barriers to Inclusion in the
                              Built Environment
      Jevon Thorpe            The Creation of an Accessible Taxi –
                              The TXI and its Future Evolution
          Andrew Walker
United Kingdom Institute    Developments Towards Inclusive Design Teaching                        147
 for Inclusive Design, UK



                            Appendix
                            2 Definition of Inclusive Design
                            Inclusive design is design which can be used regardless of age,
                            gender or disability.

                            United Kingdom Institute for Inclusive Design (UkiiD)
                            “Promoting and developing a culture of inclusion through
                            design and its application”

                            UKIID’s purpose
                            UKiiD is an organisation of and for anyone with an interest in
                            design. The keystone of our work is to promote design which is
                            inclusive – which can be used regardless of age, gender or
                            disability.

                            Core values
                            – defining how design can meet the needs of as many people as
                              possible
                            – designing buildings, transport, products and services to meet
                              the needs of people with a range        of disabilities so that
                              they are easier to use, by everybody
                            – celebrating the culture of diversity through inclusion not
                              exclusion
                            – ensuring usability and æsthetics are mutually compatible

                            Core activities
                            – creating a culture and attitude founded on inclusive design
                            – providing information on examples of good practice in inclu-
                              sive design
                            – providing practical information for design and other diverse
                              professions on all aspects of disability
                            – providing information on how to ensure design meet inclu-
                              sive principles
                            – publishing a newsletter covering trends, activities and legisla-
                              tion
                            – running seminars about relevant issues

                                                              Agreed by the Board 14 March 2001
148   UNIVERSAL design   Part 1 Europe




                                         Photo: FotoKnutsen AS
      Poul Østergaard
     Aarhus School of   Architects of Tomorrow, Accessibility of the Future –                           149
Architecture, Denmark   Teaching Accessibility at the school of Architecture in Aarhus




                        1.7 Architects of
                        Tomorrow, Accessibility of
                        the Future – Teaching
                        Accessibility at the School
                        of Architecture in Aarhus
                        Prof. Poul Østergaard, Aarhus School of Architecture


                        Background
                        Statutory requirements in Denmark demand unequivocally that
                        all construction must be accessible and must accommodate
                        everybody. This has been the Danish parliament’s response to
                        the United Nations’ Standard Rules on the Equalization of
                        Opportunities for Persons with Disabilities. The accessibility
                        requirements are laid down in the building regulations 19954.

                        Basis for the course
                        The slogans “Universal Design”, “Design for All” and “Barrier
                        Free Design” are used in the headlines of publications, national
                        and international conferences and seminars on disabilities. The
                        philosophy behind the headlines may be well enough understood,
                        but the terms are often unworkable in practice. Even “Universal
                        Design” and “Design for All” must at least to some extent be
                        based on standards, which in turn rest on notions of normality, i. e.
                        majorities, which exclude large minorities. Clothing and tools for
                        personal use must by necessity be designed to fit individual needs.
                        “Barrier free design” is and will be an empty phrase. The built
                        environment obviously has barriers, but many buildings are never-
                        theless in some way accessible for people with reduced mobility.

                        The term “accessibility” is a better term for the desire to make
                        products that can be used by the largest possible number of
                        4 Documents complementing the building regulations have been published
                          by central authorities and the organisations for the disabled. In addition,
                          several ministries have produced action plans, aiming to improving the
                          conditions whereby disabled people can participate in society. There is,
                          consequently, an endless number of publications, which architects and the
                          construction industry must know and observe.
150                         UNIVERSAL design   Part 1 Europe




      people. The term gives sufficient room for designers to weigh
      up how and in which ways disabled people best can gain access
      to all that modern society has to offer its members. As a matter
      of course, everybody should be able to access and enjoy the
      “soft values” in buildings and spaces. In addition to easy entry,
      signage and information should be easy to understand.

      However, accessibility does not only concern the built environ-
      ment. It extends for instance also to modern forms of communi-
      cation, which, by means of text, sound, symbols or pictograms
      should be easy to understand. Accessibility is comfort for the
      many, necessity for the few.

      Accessible architecture
      The starting point for “accessible architecture” is the basic
      human need to manage the activities of daily life without the
      help of others. The term arises from the particular conside-
      rations that have to be made when planning for people with dis-
      abilities: fundamentally that architects and designers can create
      architecture and products which enrich and engage the indivi-
      dual user. This however, requires that the designer possesses
      knowledge about our physical capabilities.

      If accessibility is assessed by means of “graded criteria”, the
      requirements can be rated on a scale from “decisive” to “essen-
      tial” and “suitable”. It is for instance “decisive” that a person in
      a manual wheelchair can negotiate differences of level – by
      means of ramps or slopes with a maximum gradient of 1:20.
      For wheelchair users to open doors, 0,5m unobstructed floor
      space at the door handle is “essential”. And it is “suitable” to
      have a grab bar at the centre of the door, so that a wheelchair
      user can close it easily.

      The international accessibility symbol must of course be respected.
      When, for instance, the symbol is found on the doors to public toi-
      lets, in hotel brochures and in public transport, one would naturally
      expect unobstructed access and circulation for people with im-
      paired mobility. The symbol does not, however, guarantee optimal
      conditions. The author has over the years visited numerous public
      facilities marked with the accessibility symbol. These visits have
      disclosed that toilets, which meet the needs of wheelchair users, are
      an exception rather than the rule. This again means that the symbol
      is misleading. Even the tiniest of details may be decisive as regards
      the chance of managing without help.
      Poul Østergaard
     Aarhus School of   Architects of Tomorrow, Accessibility of the Future –                   151
Architecture, Denmark   Teaching Accessibility at the school of Architecture in Aarhus




                        Allowing for human diversity
                        Human beings can only become “whole” in an environment that
                        appeals to personal development and can only achieve self-
                        respect in an inspiring intercourse with others. There is in other
                        words a need for a democratic architecture which promotes
                        individual activity and intercourse, and which assists and
                        enhances human sensibilities.

                        Particular/general
                        Adding accessibility to the other basic aspects of functional
                        architecture, it is possible to achieve a set of active rules for the
                        interplay between the participants. These rules can in some
                        respects turn the users’ limitations into inspiring ways of
                        thinking and experiencing, and thereby add something to the
                        architecture which is at once special and general.

                        Accessibility theme-days
                        Architectural education in Denmark is the responsibility of the
                        Department of Culture. The ministry’s “Plan of action for
                        disabled people’s access to culture” from 1999 states: “The
                        Ministry of Culture has started negotiations with the schools of
                        architecture about achieving a better awareness of disabilities
                        and architecture among the students.”

                        Effective from September 1st 2000, the negotiations have
                        changed the course descriptions at the two schools of architec-
                        ture in Denmark. The change has meant that by the end of the
                        second part of the course, all students must have received
                        learning and attained knowledge – through projects – about
                        accessibility for disabled people and other special needs groups.

                        The Aarhus School of Architecture has organised obligatory acces-
                        sibility “theme-days” for students every year since 1995/96. The
                        object of the theme-days is to familiarise the students with functio-
                        nal requirements and considerations that must be observed when
                        planning and designing the built environment, thus influencing the
                        students’ regard for people towards a realisation that architects can
                        contribute to alleviate the consequences of disabilities.

                        About 200 students take part in the theme-days, attending
                        lectures and field trips confronting them with the problems of
                        accessibility in the built environment. The theme-days are orga-
                        nised in periods of 2x2 days, with about 100 students at a time.
152                            UNIVERSAL design    Part 1 Europe




      The program may have the following main subjects:
      Day one morning session, lectures:
      a) “Accessibility for better or for worse”; slides and the CD-
         ROM Handicap, Architecture and design
      b) “Accessibility crosswise”; a blind person and a wheelchair
         user as lecturers
      c) “Visions in practical terms”; detached house for a
         wheelchair user (architect and owner)

      Day one afternoon session, field trips:
      The students are divided into groups of four and given a manual
      wheelchair or simulation glasses. One group member plays the
      part of a disabled person; one performs the role of helper; the
      remaining two are observers, taking notes, making sketches or
      taking photographs.




      Architecture students doing fieldwork as preparation to the thesis subject “A
      bathroom for disabled”. The project later formed the basis for the develop-
      ment of “Pressalit Multi System. Pressalit A/S Ry. Design Hanne Rasmussen.
      Poul Østergaard
     Aarhus School of   Architects of Tomorrow, Accessibility of the Future –                     153
Architecture, Denmark   Teaching Accessibility at the school of Architecture in Aarhus



                        Following a detailed plan, the groups are sent on field trips in
                        Aarhus and its environs. They may visit dwellings, shopping
                        centres, shops, restaurants, museums, theatres, town halls etc.
                        Some groups are required to use public transport to reach their
                        destinations. Upon arrival, they meet a young, disabled person,
                        who, acting as a consultant, describes his/her experience of
                        using the city and its buildings.

                        Day two, morning session, reports:
                        Each group puts together a poster giving a synopsis of their experi-
                        ences from the field trip. The poster is part of a report which is dis-
                        tributed to all students. The pedagogical reason for this part of the
                        exercise is to train the students in visual and written presentations.

                        Day two, afternoon session, lectures and discussions:
                        a) Group presentations
                        b) Planning accessible architecture, two lectures by practising
                           architects
                        c) Panel discussion run by the organisations for the disabled

                        Planning the theme days is obviously demanding. Some 40
                        wheelchairs and a suitable number of simulation glasses have to
                        be borrowed or rented from the local authority’s centre for tech-
                        nical aids, and appointments have to be made with suitably
                        knowledgeable and interesting lecturers and consultants whom
                        the students can approach for assistance in other projects.

                        Evaluation of the theme days
                        In the students’ evaluations of the theme days, the field trips are
                        seen as particularly useful. Playing the role of a disabled person
                        gives real insight into how architects can contribute to lessen the
                        difficulties disabled people encounter at home and in the outside
                        world. The theme days also contribute to combat prejudice about
                        disabled people, and the students achieve a realistic attitude to
                        the subject; their shyness is questioned and worked upon.

                        The experience gained from the theme days are often integrated
                        as a vital part of a project. Later on in the course, some choose
                        to continue working with accessibility issues, whether as a main
                        subject for a particular term or as thesis. This holds true both
                        for students of architecture and design. Examples of thesis sub-
                        jects from 2000/01 are “Communal living for young people
                        with handicaps”, “Dwelling for the third age”, “The accessible
                        opera house”, “Communal living for mentally disabled”,
                        “Easier use of bathrooms for mobility impaired people”.
154                                                          UNIVERSAL design   Part 1 Europe




      Thesis project for a collapsible walking frame.
      Line Ubbesen, Department of Industrial Design,
      1999.
      The development of the frame aspired to achieve a
      design in which both shape and materials will
      break down possible “human barriers” for its use.
      The frame has three types of breaks: One slows
      down the effect of the frame’s dead weight on slo-
      ping ground, another can be used to varying
      degrees while walking, and the third is used for
      parking, while the user rests on the seat. The roomy
      basket underneath the seat is for handbags and for
      shopping, and acts to stabiles the entire construc-
      tion. The frame was awarded 3rd prize in the plas-
      tics industry’s international design competition.
      Poul Østergaard
     Aarhus School of   Architects of Tomorrow, Accessibility of the Future –            155
Architecture, Denmark   Teaching Accessibility at the school of Architecture in Aarhus
156                        UNIVERSAL design   Part 1 Europe




      Competitions
      The two schools of architecture have organised competitions
      funded by the Ministry of Culture. The first was held in 1998,
      around the theme “Accessibility to culture – the city as the
      arena for culture”. The object was amongst others:
      – to create spaces and places which offer everybody, including
         disabled people, opportunities for activities and participation
         in the cultural life of the city.
      – to develop innovations, visions and proposals for architecture
         and design for everybody
      – to influence public debate and direct attention towards archi-
         tectural quality and user demands
      – to differentiate questions of human values and develop he
         notions of normality
      – to create a dialogue between disabled people/user organisati-
         ons and architects/schools of architecture

      33 proposals were submitted, receiving the following comment
      from the panel of judges: “The best proposals show that atten-
      tion to accessibility requirements cannot on its own lead to bet-
      ter design of access and interiors, but can add richness to the
      ways architecture is experienced and new architectural types.”

      The submissions included subjects like:
      – City, area and local meeting points
      – Historic edifices in the landscape
      – Dwellings in the city
      – Design, information technology and Cyberspace as keys to
        culture

      The first prize of DKK 50000 was awarded a project titled
      “Access to Nature – The Museum for World Culture in
      Gothenburg”. Projects which kept strictly to the main theme of
      the competition received another four awards.

      The other competition, titled “Dwelling for the Future”, was
      announced in September 2000 in collaboration with the Danish
      Building and Research Institute. Invitations for participation
      were issued to students at the School of Architecture at the
      Academy of Fine Arts, the School of Architecture in Aarhus,
      Denmark’s Shcool of Design and the Kolding Shool of Design.
      The intention is that the students from different schools shall
      work together in teams.
      Poul Østergaard
     Aarhus School of   Architects of Tomorrow, Accessibility of the Future –                        157
Architecture, Denmark   Teaching Accessibility at the school of Architecture in Aarhus



                        The main aim of the competition is to develop visionary and
                        practical solutions for dwellings for the future, stressing sustai-
                        nability and accessibility, with the actual construction of the
                        scheme – a 1:1 prototype of a city dwelling for the future,
                        focussing on the two themes as the end result. To inspire the
                        participants, a variety of specialists have given lectures at semi-
                        nars at the four schools. Deadline for submissions was May 31st
                        2001. DKK 100,000 have been set aside for prizes.

                        Other initiatives at the School of
                        Architecture in Aarhus
                        Aarhus School of Architecture has organised a course in acces-
                        sibility for architects in practice. The object of the course was to
                        inspire the participants to take the accessibility requirements
                        into account while at the drawing board (or the computer). At
                        the same time, the participants received necessary insight and
                        tools to handle the statutes requiring that the city as well as its
                        spaces and buildings should be accessible to everybody.

                        The course came about as a result of a demand from the
                        Ministry for Cities and Housing that the local authorities must
                        observe the accessibility requirements. The Ministry has pre-
                        scribed that issues relating to impaired mobility, seeing, hearing
                        and understanding must receive particular attention in all new
                        construction. The prescription also demands that dimensional
                        requirements are observed and that exemptions are kept to a
                        minimum5.

                        The course corresponded in principle with the theme days, but
                        greater stress was put on statutory accessibility requirements.
                        As on the theme days, participants were sent on field trips,
                        using wheelchairs, which they experienced as useful in their
                        professional practice. One of the subjects in the concluding
                        discussion, was how architects can contribute to the assistance
                        our society offers disabled people, without jeopardising archi-
                        tectural quality.



                        5 On the subject of accessibility requirements, the then Minister for
                          Cities and Housing wrote in the Ministry’s newsletter: «I have a vision
                          that we will, in the future, be able to market Denmark as the country
                          where accessibility in the built environment is a matter of course. This
                          will not be done over night. To reach this goal we have to surf ahead
                          using easily understandable information and goal oriented political
                          initiatives, and follow through with sensible statutes.
158                           UNIVERSAL design    Part 1 Europe




      The research project ”the Multifunctional Kitchen” consists of four scena-
      rios detailing how a kitchen may be designed and adapted in line with
      changing user demands over time. The figure shows scenario no 4 in an
      old person’s home adapted for a wheelchair user. Design: Lone
      Kobberholm Storgaard. 2000.




      For the corner of the kitchen table, carrousel cupboards that can be ele-
      vated have been developed. The cupboards can be reached by people who
      are standing or sitting.
      Poul Østergaard
     Aarhus School of   Architects of Tomorrow, Accessibility of the Future –                       159
Architecture, Denmark   Teaching Accessibility at the school of Architecture in Aarhus




                        The sink is specially made from the heat resisting material Corean, to
                        avoid burns on thighs. Note especially the edge-mounted tap. The dish
                        washing machine is placed at a height where it is accessible both by whe-
                        elchair users and people who are standing.


                        Accessibility as an area of special
                        concern
                        The multifunctional kitchen
                        The school management decided in 1996 that accessibility
                        should be given emphasis as a field of research at the Aarhus
                        school of architecture. One result has been a Ph.D. scholarship
                        on the “Multifunctional kitchen – an investigation into and
                        experiments with special needs”.
160                          UNIVERSAL design   Part 1 Europe




      The research project starts form the following hypothesis: A pro-
      duct in which function and deliberate design forms a higher unity
      will have qualities that lie beyond what is immediately visible
      and expected. The product will therefore possess a number of
      merits making it well functioning and eminently suitable in condi-
      tions that go a lot further than its intended common usage and
      functional value. The aim of the project is to develop multifuncti-
      onal products, which people with small or large disabilities can
      use easily and without limitations. Through theory and practice,
      the dissertation sought to test the hypothesis in the real world.

      The dissertation was approved in December 2000 and gives a
      number of concrete proposals for the thoughtful adaptation of a
      kitchen to the needs of self-sufficient wheelchair users. A cen-
      tral feature of the project is a full-scale prototype, which has
      been adapted for a young female wheelchair user. The disserta-
      tion also contains a series of recommendations for architects,
      designers and manufacturers when developing new products6.

      Accessibility handbook
      Another initiative at the Aarhus School of Architecture is an
      ongoing research project which will result in a handbook on
      accessibility. The object of this project is to publish information
      about planning and design of the physical environment in rela-
      tion to the needs of disabled people. The information is being
      prepared and presented in such a way that it can be used
      directly, with no need for complex deliberations. It is intended
      for use in architects’ offices and for others that are involved in
      building and construction as well as for local authority building
      and planning departments.

      The information will be given in written form as well as draw-
      ings and photographs, showing how accessibility may be
      achieved for persons with temporary or permanent disabilities.
      The requirements in the building code are the basis for the
      proposals. The research effort of this project consists of collect-
      ing and arranging systematically material that may influence
      architectural and planning norms. The project may be seen as a
      departure from traditional programming, which rests on the
      dimensions and capabilities of the fully functioning adult
      person, as depicted by Leonardo da Vinci and le Corbusier.

      6 The dissertation, including a synopsis in English is written by Lone
        Kobberholm Storgaard, Ph.D., and is available on loan from the library
        at the Aarhus School of Architecture.
      Poul Østergaard
     Aarhus School of   Architects of Tomorrow, Accessibility of the Future –                       161
Architecture, Denmark   Teaching Accessibility at the school of Architecture in Aarhus




                        Handicap, Architecture and Design is available both in MC and PC versi-
                        ons. Author Poul Østergaard, Aarhus School of Architecture. 1996



                        The handbook is directed towards practising architects. It will
                        present essential accessibility requirements, including drawings,
                        photos and written comments showing good and bad examples
                        of how architects have produced solutions to accessibility pro-
                        blems. The handbook is planned for release in the autumn of
                        2001 and is a development of the CD-ROM Handicap,
                        Architecture and Design (HA&D), which the author of this arti-
                        cle has produced. The CD-ROM has about 1000 sequences,
                        which by means of film, animations, drawings and sound show
                        some of the difficulties handicapped people may meet inside
                        and outside the home, and which architects can alleviate during
                        the design stage. HA&D is a planning tool for architects and
                        others who are involved with the shaping of the physical sur-
                        roundings of daily life. A revised version of the CD-ROM will
                        be available as an appendix to the accessibility handbook. The
                        CD-ROM is available in Danish, English, Japanese and
                        Portugese.7

                        7 Handicap, Architecure and Design is published by Christian Ejlers’ for-
                          lag, P.O. box 2228 Copenhagen K. e-mail: lieber@ce-publishers.dk
                        162




Photo: FotoKnutsen AS
     Edward S
     New York   163




Part 2
North America
164   UNIVERSAL design   Part 2 North America




                                                Photo: FotoKnutsen AS
      Edward Steinfeld
        and Beth Tauke   Universal Designing                                                    165
Buffalo, New York, USA




                         2.1 Universal Designing
                         Edward Steinfeld, Arch. D. Professor of Architecture, and Beth
                         Tauke, M.F.A. Associate Professor of Architecture, School of
                         Architecture and Planning, State University of New York at
                         Buffalo, Buffalo, NY, U.S.A.


                         Introduction
                         The origins of barrier free or accessible design lie in the field of
                         rehabilitation. After World War II, the practice of rehabilitation
                         was successful enough that physicians and therapists were able
                         to provide many people with severe disabilities enough func-
                         tion, skills and technology for them to accomplish activities of
                         daily living independently. But, they discovered that the envi-
                         ronment outside the rehabilitation center was not conducive to
                         independent living by their “clients” without modification –
                         removal of barriers to mobility.

                         Barrier free design is based on a therapeutic philosophy. The
                         objective is to intervene in the environment so that people with
                         disabilities can be more independent. It is primarily a top-down
                         approach based on a regulatory model.

                         Universal Design, however, is concerned with more than just
                         removal of barriers. It seeks to eliminate discrimination by
                         design and support full social participation for all members of
                         society. There are two underlying assumptions in this idea. The
                         first is that all people can benefit from improved function, not
                         just people with disabilities. The second is that social partici-
                         pation requires respect and avoidance of stigma. Thus, unlike
                         barrier free design, which is concerned solely with benefits for
                         a specific group of people, Universal Design is concerned with
                         the benefits for the entire population. And, unlike the purely
                         functional goals of accessible design, Universal Design is
                         concerned with how the appearance of things affects social
                         perceptions. Ultimately, Universal Design sets its sights beyond
                         breaking physical barriers to include the redefinition of disable-
                         ment as a universal condition, a condition of difference that we
                         all share (Wijk, 1997).
166                          UNIVERSAL design   Part 2 North America




      Breaking barriers
      Above: Tearing apart the Berlin Wall, Photo courtesy Fredrick Rahm
      (http://www.remote.org/frederik/culture/berlin/)
      Below: Photo, Edward Steinfeld

      Many would argue that universal design education should
      include a focus on therapeutic intervention. But, there is
      another equally important tradition in education that has not
      been acknowledged sufficiently. This second tradition origi-
      nated in the humanities and the social sciences rather than the
      professions of environmental design and rehabilitation. While
      the practitioners of barrier free design were developing their
      technical knowledge base, the proponents of disability rights in
      other disciplines were trying to understand how social and
      cultural conditions are related to disability and how they
      influence attitudes, values and practices in society. Their work,
      which has come to be called “Disability Studies”, is a cultural
      critique that views disability as socially defined rather than
      solely a function of impairment. By extension, the experience
      of disability and the social response to it involves far more than
      a concern for function.
      Edward Steinfeld
        and Beth Tauke   Universal Designing                                                   167
Buffalo, New York, USA



                         Universal Design, in fact, emerged through a cultural critique.
                         The need to design environments to be accessible to and usable
                         by people with disabilities was viewed by second generation
                         proponents including some, like Ron Mace and Ruth Hall
                         Lusher in the United States, who were both trained as architects
                         and had disabilities themselves, as a symptom of a broad failure
                         of society to incorporate disability into its consciousness. Their
                         argument was that if disability is perceived as a “normal” part
                         of life – something that could happen to any of us – then the
                         material world would be designed to accommodate it without
                         the need for a political movement or professional specialty.
                         Accessibility and usability, they argued, should be a goal of
                         design right from the start. Every designer should be able to
                         design an environment that will benefit everyone, not just
                         temporarily able-bodied people.

                         This view of Universal Design as a cultural critique is very
                         exciting for design education because the form of pedagogy
                         most emphasized in the design professions is criticism. Nothing
                         is sacred in a design critique. Students are encouraged through-
                         out their academic career to develop skills of critical thinking.
                         Faculty in the design disciplines are experts at criticism. But,
                         Universal Design is too often presented as a therapeutic inter-
                         vention or as an ideological campaign, two approaches that are
                         not received in a positive way in our postmodern academic
                         culture. The popularity of the Principles of Universal Design
                         (Connel, et al. 1997) as a pedagogic framework and “attitudinal
                         change” as a focus of introductions to Universal Design are
                         examples of this emphasis. The prescriptive nature of the
                         Principles adopts the stance of therapy and the focus on attitude
                         change is a form of ideological indoctrination.

                         To persuade our peers in academia and our students to recog-
                         nize the value of Universal Design, we must develop a reflec-
                         tive pedagogy that not only retains the original critical focus of
                         universal design as a philosophy but also involves self-criticism
                         to uncover the significant intellectual foundation behind the
                         ideology and also the limitations in the ideology itself. A reflec-
                         tive perspective on the concept of Universal Design, in particu-
                         lar, will help us to understand how others perceive our own
                         work and help us develop more effective educational pedago-
                         gies and practices. We hope that such pedagogies will engage
                         our very best students and convince them not only to practice
                         Universal Design, but perhaps also to become Universal Design
                         educators themselves.
168                        UNIVERSAL design   Part 2 North America




      In the rest of this chapter, we present three critiques. The first
      will examine the de-institutionalization movement of the
      1970’s, the first attempt to use social policy to accomplish
      social integration of people with disabilities, using ideas of
      symbolic interactionism, a philosophical movement associated
      with George Herbert Mead and the Chicago School. The second
      will examine the genesis of universal design in the barrier free
      design movement through the lens of formal rationalization, a
      theory developed by the German sociologist, Max Weber. The
      third will turn our attention to universal design itself using a
      critique that focuses on the utopian nature of the movement
      using the ideas of Sir Thomas More and Ruth Levitas. Each
      argument will identify pedagogical approaches to make the
      study of universal design intellectually stimulating and rewar-
      ding as part of a general design education.

      Through the Looking Glass
        We mold things in our images: they, in their turn, shape us by
        the resistance they offer when we try to impose our own
        personal form on them. (David Harvey 1989)

      The Symbolic Interactionist school in philosophy developed a
      perspective on self and society that led to the contemporary
      notion of social construction. George Herbert Mead (1934)
      argued that shared meanings evolve through social interaction.
      Society can be understood as a symbolic representation of that
      interaction. One’s sense of self, or a group’s shared sense of
      self, evolves from interaction with others and through an inter-
      nal interaction in which we imaginatively take the role of the
      “other”. Charles Cooley called this process “The Looking Glass
      Self ” (1902).

      From this perspective, the relationship of material culture
      (architecture, products, vehicles, communication systems,
      media, etc.) to social life is characterized by reciprocity.
      Material culture is a physical order that, on one hand, reflects
      the social order. On the other hand, material culture also pre-
      scribes a social order. Physical artifacts not only tell us much
      about the way a social system works, but they make it work in
      specific ways. One example is the cellular telephone. The popu-
      larity of these devices throughout the world symbolically
      reflects a global culture that puts great value on instantaneous
      communication. At the same time, this culture (including the
      technology) enables the increasing interconnectedness of
      people throughout the world.
      Edward Steinfeld
        and Beth Tauke   Universal Designing                                                  169
Buffalo, New York, USA



                         There are many examples of such reciprocity. A plan of any
                         building, for example, gives us insight into which group of
                         people in the inhabiting organization has the most power, and, it
                         also channels social behavior in ways that can enforce or
                         counteract the power of specific inhabitants. The allocation of
                         land in a community demonstrates the value placed on different
                         activities such as recreation or education. It also affects how
                         residents will utilize the community for those purposes. The
                         appearance of automobiles connotes the differences in the
                         status or lifestyles of their owners but it also contributes to
                         social interaction patterns, e.g. who is attracted to whom, con-
                         firming those differences. The relationship of design to be-
                         havior is not, of course, completely deterministic but there is no
                         denying that material culture plays an important role.

                         Given this reciprocal relationship, it is no surprise that social
                         change is reflected by changes in our material world, and that
                         changes in the material world contribute to the progress of
                         social change itself. In cultures where traditions are strong and
                         change is slow, we find many enduring patterns or material
                         culture with a particularly clear and homogeneous formal lang-
                         uage, both in vocabulary and syntax (see, for example, Hillier
                         and Hanson, 1984). But, many other less consistent examples
                         are also represented in the historical record. Where change is
                         particularly rapid and complex, the established and new orders
                         exist side by side. Thus, today we find people using cell phones
                         in places where the predominant material culture is pre-
                         industrial and small illegal radio stations finding niches within
                         content space neglected by the media giants.

                         The essence of universal design is to enable, through changes in
                         material culture, more competence, independence and social
                         integration through design, especially to previously disadvanta-
                         ged groups. There is at least one historical precedent for this
                         endeavor. Hayden (1981) described the emergence of the
                         material feminist movement in the mid 1800’s. Early feminists
                         recognized the relationship between the domestic environment
                         and the status of women. They argued that the nuclear house-
                         hold was supported by the unpaid domestic work of women.
                         They further argued that the burden of such work, which, at the
                         time, was far greater than today, segregated women and kept
                         them from taking a leadership role in community life. Adopting
                         an industrial model, they showed how homes could be designed
                         to be more efficient and housework could be mechanized with
                         labor saving devices in order to free women from this burden
170                        UNIVERSAL design   Part 2 North America




      and give them the time to pursue other vocations. Further, they
      invented new social organizations and building types to house
      them that would provide a significant community role. One of
      their ideas was removing the activities of food preparation from
      the home. Community kitchens would be substituted where
      women would work for pay and provide the meals for a whole
      neighborhood.

      Many ideas promoted by the material feminists eventually
      found their way into the mainstream, for example, take-out
      food, vacuum cleaners and housecleaning services. However,
      the liberation prophesized by the material feminist theorists did
      not come to pass in the way they expected. While most women
      are now in the workforce and are increasingly taking on lea-
      dership roles in the community and the absolute burden of
      domestic work for women in industrial societies has been
      reduced, that has not necessarily brought them into an equal
      partnership with men with respect to who does the housework,
      nor have they yet achieved equality in the workplace outside the
      home.

      The policy to eliminate residential institutions for people with
      disabilities and replace them with small scale, community
      residences has surprising parallels to the material feminist
      movement. De-institutionalization sought to liberate people
      with a disability from the status of a disadvantaged minority by
      altering the physical environment to reduce dependence and
      stigma and increase equal opportunity of access to community
      resources. And, as with the material feminist movement, things
      did not turn out quite the way that the proponents of these ideas
      originally expected. Examining these results can uncover some
      interesting implications for universal design education.

      The transformation of the institution was guided by «normali-
      zation theory» (Wolfensberger, 1972). The perception of social
      difference, argued normalization theorists, was the root cause of
      the social problems related to disability. Disability was, in fact,
      a social construction of the 19th century. They argued that if
      people with disabilities are treated as individuals who have
      differences, rather than a class of people who are different, their
      specific needs could be addressed through a more humane
      approach. Thus, in the design of facilities for the new commu-
      nity-based organizations, «normal» environments were (and
      are) mandated. The definition of “normal” has both program-
      matic and aesthetic components because the appearance of
      Edward Steinfeld
        and Beth Tauke   Universal Designing                                                     171
Buffalo, New York, USA



                         one’s living environment can be stigmatizing, setting up social
                         distance between people with disabilities and the rest of the
                         population.

                         The historical association of disability and social difference
                         (defined as “deviance”) with institutions created strong
                         symbolic content in architectural forms. Perhaps the most
                         obvious characteristic of institutions is their scale. They are
                         always much larger than other residential building types. Even a
                         modular organization (e.g., cottages) fails to mask their actual
                         size. The highly repetitive and regular appearance of institutions
                         was generated by beliefs in the ability of order in architecture to
                         imbue order in human minds and social behavior (Rothman,
                         1971). It persists as an institutional aesthetic. The institution has
                         a characteristic spatial syntax that reflects its emphasis on
                         social control. Visual exposure is high and privacy is low.
                         Circulation patterns are generally more hierarchical and direc-
                         ted than in non-institutional settings.

                         Normalizing an environment, then, includes not only the deve-
                         lopment of a «non-institutional» aesthetic i.e., informal as
                         opposed to regular, small scale as opposed to large, and roofs
                         similar to the prevailing norms in the surrounding context, but
                         also, a spatial syntax that creates a non-institutional experience,
                         e.g. culturally normative levels of privacy.

                         For people with disabilities severe enough (usually mental
                         impairments and often physical impairments as well) that they
                         cannot live independently in the community, group homes have
                         become the alternative to institutionalization. They are a form
                         of cooperative homemaking with a paid staff, similar in concept
                         to the boarding home which at one time was a prevalent form of
                         housing for young industrial workers of both genders (Hayden,
                         1981). A major difference, however, is that group homes are not
                         owned by a resident manager but rather by agencies or organi-
                         zations that manage networks of dispersed facilities.

                         Although principles of normalization guide the design of group
                         homes, in the U.S. at least, there are many factors that prevent the
                         complete realization of the normalization ideal. Most group
                         homes have 2–4 staff members present at all times, working in
                         shifts. They are owned and administered by state and voluntary
                         agencies, often the very same organizations that once operated
                         institutions (some still do). The cost of operating group homes is
                         covered by the state but, being funded by taxpayers, has its limits.
172                          UNIVERSAL design   Part 2 North America




      Because of the perception that larger homes are more cost effi-
      cient, most group homes (in the U.S.) house 6–12 people. The
      residents often have both physical and mental impairments. The
      normative form for a house so large in the U.S. is typically a
      2–3-story structure, but the degree of disability of the residents
      often precludes a multistory design. Thus these homes tend to
      look very different than other homes in the immediate vicinity
      because they are much larger in land coverage and longer and
      lower in profile.




      Different household compositions than conventional single family homes
      demand a different form for group homes. The right photo demonstrates
      that they don’t have to look strange and awkward.
      Photos: IDEA Center



      In the single family context of most American communities, the
      group home requires parking for a large number of automobiles
      since there needs to be enough room for two shifts of staff
      (most of whom drive to work) as well as visiting professional
      staff. Parking a row of 4–6 vehicles at the curb is not socially
      acceptable in the low density American landscape.

      There are many other physical differences between group
      homes and the typical American single family home related to
      different fire safety requirements, the need to supervise medica-
      tions, the need to provide an efficient workplace for the staff
      and, in severe climates, the need to provide a protected area for
      loading and unloading wheelchair vans.

      The awkward and unusual appearance of many group homes
      could be avoided by devoting more resources to their construc-
      tion, especially by reducing the number of occupants. However,
      Edward Steinfeld
        and Beth Tauke   Universal Designing                                                    173
Buffalo, New York, USA



                         there is not much public support for the construction of very
                         expensive homes for indigent people who don’t appear to be
                         productive members of society. In truth, most, if not all resi-
                         dents of group homes are fully employed or fully engaged in
                         educational programs, but the public perception is different
                         because they do not work in “normal” occupations and are not
                         studying in conventional educational facilities. The lack of
                         resources devoted to making the group home fit more smoothly
                         into the social fabric of communities is an instance of recipro-
                         city. The social value of the residents is reflected in the physical
                         structure of the buildings. A social policy that commits ade-
                         quate resources as well as rhetoric is needed to improve the
                         social integration of people with severe disabilities. In the U.S.,
                         the current status of group homes represents the “halfway
                         pregnant” nature of much current social policy toward people
                         with disabilities. In fact, one critic called it “disabled policy”
                         (Berkowitz, 1987).

                         The contradiction between the ideals of de-institutionalization
                         and the reality of facilities like group homes is a fertile ground
                         for universal design education. It provides the opportunity to
                         examine the relationship between movements for social justice,
                         social policy and environmental design. Bringing a critical
                         perspective to this investigation opens up a dialogue about the
                         place of disability and how social policy has fallen short of the
                         ideal. Moreover, it is an excellent ground for examining the
                         nature of “normality” itself. What is “normal”? How have
                         notions of ‘normal’ changed throughout history and cultures?
                         How do scale, shape, material and other physical factors signify
                         normality or difference? Could the group home be a model for
                         other housing options? Could it become a legitimate housing
                         option for people without disabilities? Would that make this
                         house form less stigmatizing? Furthermore, the group home
                         can be studied as a historical evolution of the material feminist
                         idea. In fact, the material feminists proposed cooperative house-
                         keeping for the broader population as a way to reduce the bur-
                         den of unpaid domestic work for women. Perhaps, as housing
                         types evolve, e.g. senior housing or hospice housing, the group
                         home will be less stigmatized.

                         A pedagogy based on the concept of cooperative housekeeping
                         for people with severe disabilities as an entry point to a broader
                         social critique is very interesting to students and provides an
                         opportunity to teach a more significant lesson, one that is trans-
                         ferable to almost any other design project where public funds
174                        UNIVERSAL design   Part 2 North America




      are used to house a disadvantaged population. In fact, there are
      clear parallels with housing for older people, the poor, students,
      people with AIDS and victims of domestic abuse. Can housing
      adopt a universal design that will accommodate people who
      need significant levels of support and/or supervision? The
      challenge in this question is to find housing forms that truly
      embody the ideals of democracy and social justice yet meet the
      specific needs of the group. This should include, in the context
      of an academic exercise, examining alternatives to the social
      policies, attitudes and economics of the existing order and how
      those alternatives might provide a basis for a different design
      response. In universal design, students should engage these
      issues seriously. By doing so, their minds will be opened to
      alternative social realities, not only alternative physical forms.

      The Iron Cage
        “Despite the advantages it offers, bureaucracy suffers from
        the irrationality of rationality.” (George Ritzer, 2000)

      Max Weber was a German sociologist who studied the evo-
      lution of bureaucracies in societies around the world (Weber,
      1921). Based on his analysis, he argued that the culture of the
      Western world (today one could extend this to the increasingly
      Westernized global culture) was increasingly dominated by the
      values of efficiency, predictability, calculability and introduc-
      tion of nonhuman technologies. He called this process ratio-
      nalization and argued that bureaucracies were the best
      manifestation of this process. He observed that the bureaucracy
      has a tendency toward formal rationalization – the search for
      the optimum means to a given end shaped by rules, regulations
      and larger social structures. Weber argued that the process of
      formal rationalization can lead to an “Iron Cage” of rationality
      – a situation where the rationalized detail of the regulatory pro-
      cess creates so many constraints that irrationality is the result.
      Nothing could be a better example of this process than the regu-
      latory world of barrier-free or accessible design in the U.S.

      Technical knowledge is necessary to create barrier free buil-
      dings. To design an effective ramp, for example, one must know
      the maximum slope that can be negotiated by a severely dis-
      abled individual, e.g. a person who uses a wheelchair. Those
      within the design professions who had the requisite technical
      knowledge in the early days of the barrier free design move-
      ment during the 1950’s and early 1960’s were the architects of
      rehabilitation facilities and equipment. Together with rehabilita-
      Edward Steinfeld
        and Beth Tauke   Universal Designing                                                  175
Buffalo, New York, USA



                         tion professionals and consumer advocates, they invented the
                         specialty of barrier free design. The emphasis on regulatory
                         activity as a way to implement barrier free design in the U.S.
                         resulted from the general lack of technical knowledge and
                         interest in the subject within the design professions. Although
                         voluntary efforts were initiated during the early 1960’s to
                         encourage designers, particularly architects, to engage the issue,
                         it became clear by the late 1960’s that accessibility to the
                         environment could not be achieved on a voluntary basis.

                         The first Federal legislation on barrier free design, the
                         Architectural Barriers Act, was passed in 1968. In 1975, a
                         government review exposed the lack of compliance with this
                         law (GAO, 1975). Since then, a succession of laws and
                         regulations gradually expanded the types of buildings covered
                         and strengthened enforcement policies. In addition, the techni-
                         cal provisions of regulations also greatly expanded. The initial
                         voluntary standard was less than 10 pages (ANSI A117.1,
                         1961). The same standard today has almost 70 pages
                         (ICC/ANSI A117.1, 1998). Each step along the way, there has
                         been considerable resistance from the building industry and the
                         design professions (Steinfeld, 1977). With the advent of com-
                         plex regulations, legal processes and penalties, the need for
                         knowledge grew but it was not necessary, as in the early days,
                         to learn about the needs of people with disabilities directly; all
                         that was necessary was to learn the regulations and the process.

                         Although advocates, like the authors, support the regulatory
                         process as the only way, in the current framework, to insure that
                         access is provided, there is no question that the regulatory
                         system has evolved into an “Iron Cage.” Two examples illustrate
                         the problem.

                         The Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) has regulations that
                         cover all buildings constructed with Federal funding, including
                         housing, and another set that covers all public accommodations.
                         However, the agency that develops the rules that are used to
                         specify the technical design criteria, the U.S. Access Board, is
                         not mandated (i.e. therefore not allowed) to develop rules for
                         housing. The ADA Guidelines (1984) for public accommoda-
                         tions are being revised to reflect new knowledge from research
                         and practical experience, but the housing standards will not be
                         changed. There are some significant differences between the
                         two sets of criteria but they are, to anyone but an expert, very
                         difficult to find. Thus, architects are forced to use the obsolete
176                         UNIVERSAL design   Part 2 North America




      design criteria or follow the more up to date and improved
      technical criteria and risk having their buildings cited as non-
      compliant by overzealous regulators who only accept compli-
      ance with a specific set of standards.

      Although the U.S. Federal government develops the ADA
      Guidelines, each state in the country can develop building code
      requirements for accessibility for use in the state. Many states
      have adopted the ADA Guidelines but many others have deve-
      loped their own standards. Thus, architects and developers
      working in many states have to know the differences. As each
      state develops new rules that are not in the ADA, the rules tend
      to be disseminated to other states and eventually find their way
      into the national standards. The accessibility “industry” thrives
      on adopting new rules to address the needs of specific consti-
      tuencies rather than completing research on the needs and care-
      fully examining the value of those rules using empirical
      methods. Over time, then, the complexity of the rules has incre-
      ased with questionable results in terms of improving accessibi-
      lity. A serious negative backlash from the building industry
      developed because of the arbitrary and confusing regulatory
      situation. In fact, the detailed rules actually prohibit innovation
      through universal design in many cases.

      Thus, what started out as a social movement to create equal
      opportunity access to resources in society has been transformed
      into a bureaucratic exercise in enforcement. In the litigious
      U.S., this has produced a veritable industry of accessibility
      “experts” whose main technical skills are remembering the
      details of the regulations and knowing how the government
      interprets them. While creating employment opportunities for a
      few, the regulatory environment has created an adversarial
      relationship between advocates on one side and architects and
      building owners and developers on the other. Moreover, it has
      resulted in a situation where the design professions, both in
      academia and in practice, do not look upon barrier free design
      as an opportunity for creative design. The discourse of barrier
      free design is basically viewed as a part of building code com-
      pliance or technical problem solving. This is evident by the
      general lack of aesthetic content in the literature on the subject.
      Most examples of barrier free design perpetuate the cold clini-
      cal look of its institutional precedents.

      In general, the tendency to legislate reform can be understood,
      from the public’s perspective, as a lack of trust in professionals.
      Edward Steinfeld
        and Beth Tauke   Universal Designing                                                  177
Buffalo, New York, USA



                         In contemporary post-industrial societies, the belief in the
                         goodwill of an elite professional class governed by its own stan-
                         dards of ethics and interests is no longer operative. The history
                         of barrier free design suggests that the public’s mistrust may be
                         well founded. Few designers, (who, in the U.S., are mostly
                         white, temporarily able bodied males) personally identify with
                         the interests of people who have disabilities. The regulatory
                         route may be the most effective political strategy that a minority
                         group can use to insure the provision of basic human rights.
                         Through the policy-making process, advocates can appeal to
                         humanistic values espoused by the society as a whole. The top-
                         down imposition of political pressure is also much more effi-
                         cient and effective than trying to educate and monitor every
                         professional or building in every community in the country.

                         From the profession’s perspective, regulations represent an
                         intrusion on the architect’s responsibility and a demonstration
                         that they are losing control over the power to make design
                         decisions. Since the regulations constrain the way buildings
                         look, they also represent an attack, by outside interests, on the
                         «sacred» aesthetic domain of architects. Given the trends, it is
                         likely that future regulations will proscribe such detailed design
                         features as the shape of roofs on group homes and the fonts
                         used in signs. The shift of power and territorial infringement
                         has put the profession on the defensive to the point where pro-
                         fessional associations are just as likely to resist improving
                         access to buildings as they are to promote it.

                         Regulations in themselves, however, do not ensure social
                         change. Regulatory activity is a political process in which nego-
                         tiation and compromise take place. The accessibility achieved
                         through regulations is only as extensive as the rules incorpora-
                         ted in them. These rules are almost exclusively minimum
                         requirements. Thus, the codification of barrier-free design in-
                         sures accessibility to a degree, but tends to reduce creative
                         thinking that might result in more accessible places, products
                         and systems. Perhaps the most limiting impact of regulations is
                         that they perpetuate the myth that accessibility is a technical
                         problem rather than an opportunity for engaging imagination.
                         It is noteworthy that when the design for Frank Loyd Wright’s
                         Guggenheim Museum was completed, there were no regulations
                         mandating access to public buildings. Unfettered by rules, he
                         created an imaginative solution to the problem of making
                         buildings accessible – he sloped the building instead of building
                         a ramp.
178                        UNIVERSAL design   Part 2 North America




      The critical examination of accessibility regulations is a good
      point of departure for introducing universal design in an edu-
      cational context. Both faculty peers and students generally
      share the profession’s anathema toward imposition of rules from
      outside its world and the loss of control over the territory of
      design. An educational activity that starts with a critique of the
      regulatory approach, exposing both the necessity of regulations
      and their detrimental effect, can then move on to pose the chal-
      lenge of an alternative. The alternative, of course, is universal
      design.

      In opposition to the idea of designing to meet regulations that
      protect a class of people, the driving idea behind universal
      design is that the physical world should serve the needs of all
      people including those who have a disability. This concept
      effectively transforms the mental representation of a building
      user. Rather than designing a building for a stereotypical ave-
      rage person or special interest group, universal design promotes
      a culturally pluralistic representation of building users. Rather
      than focusing on the blind adherence to rules, universal design
      requires that designers learn about the design issues behind the
      rules and how to generalize to situations where rules are not
      applicable.

      Universal design practice first emerged in the field of product
      design, where there are very few regulations related to usability
      by people with disabilities. This, like the Guggenheim example,
      supports the view that regulatory activity can actually retard the
      integration of disability as part of “normal” design practice.
      Designers of “universal” products and buildings focus on use-
      fulness as a source of imaginative exploration as opposed to
      rules as a constraint. Moreover, they recognize that people with
      disabilities are not the only ones to benefit from more useful
      artifacts. Historically, many revolutionary products originated
      as assistive technology, including the typewriter, the telephone,
      e-mail and voice recognition. Their utility appealed to everyone
      and these products have truly changed our way of life.
      Usefulness has a great deal of appeal if it benefits a wide range
      of people.

      Universal design, however, goes quite a bit further than simply
      transferring technology from the realm of rehabilitation to the
      general consumer market. Successful universal designs appeal
      to a broader constituency because of their sound ergonomic
      principles and attractive appearance. It is not enough to provide
      Edward Steinfeld
        and Beth Tauke   Universal Designing                                                      179
Buffalo, New York, USA



                                                                Add on structures perpetuate
                                                                the stigma of disability, but
                                                                accessibility practiced as uni-
                                                                versal design can be an inspi-
                                                                ration for form making.




                                                                Everson Museum of Art (c.
                                                                1975) I.M. Pei, Architect,
                                                                Photo Edward Steinfeld




                                                                High Museum, Richard
                                                                Meier, Architect, Photo
                                                                Edward Steinfeld

                         a feature people want; universal design has to make that feature
                         easy to use and attractive to the consumer. As everyone knows
                         from personal experience, even revolutionary technologies like
                         the VCR, can be daunting when it comes to usability. Clearly
                         the idea of universal design is highly compatible with goals of
                         contemporary capitalism. And, in fact, product manufacturers
                         have been quick to use it as a marketing tool to expand markets,
                         particularly to the older population.

                         Universal design has several attractive characteristics that make
                         it a more powerful idea than barrier free design. First, it
                         expands the constituency of design from disabled people to
                         elderly people, children, women and others who have been
                         under-represented in the design consciousness. Second, the
180                         UNIVERSAL design   Part 2 North America




      focus of universal design is on invention rather than regulation.
      Third, universal design overcomes the perpetuation of social
      difference. The idea is to infuse design with an inclusive
      approach. Barrier free design, on the other hand, is associated
      with the bureaucratic culture, which leads to the Iron Cage. Its
      underlying concern for people is disguised and hidden by regu-
      lation, which is associated with social control. In particular,
      design by regulation assumes there is only one “best” way to do
      something. And, its constituency is limited to people with dis-
      abilities and the accessibility industry. Universal design offers a
      new philosophical position for the practicing professional. It
      offers an opportunity to «eliminate the fascism in our heads»
      (Harvey, 1989, p. 45) by incorporating the perspectives of
      groups that have been marginalized by the design professions.

      Universal design is not, of course, immune to a negative conno-
      tation from the perspective of formal rationalization. The very
      name itself connotes a single universal «solution» to any design
      problem – the “one best way”. The idea of a sensibility that
      responds to all can too easily be perceived as a doctrine that
      denies the legitimacy of many particular perspectives. Universal
      Design, if narrowly conceived, could submerge the identity of a
      group within the «universal». Normalization theory shares this
      same tendency, a «search for invisibility». It demands norma-
      tive appearances, rejecting the avant-garde because of its con-
      notation of difference. This is, in some ways, contradictory to
      the idea of embracing difference. Even people with disabilities
      are proud of their differences, the distinctions that make them
      unique. They just don’t want to be stigmatized because of them.
      Designers, particularly those who teach in academia, are suspi-
      cious of an ideology that appears to reject difference and explo-
      ratory formal explorations. That is why we believe that the term
      “inclusive design” or the European term “Design for All” are
      more accurate terms for what universal design is all about, par-
      ticularly because we have had to invest much time overcoming
      the false perceptions described above.

      Utopia
        “Every daring attempt to make a great change in existing
        conditions, every lofty vision of new possibilities for the
        human race, has been labeled utopian.” (Emma Goldman c.
        1912, first published in Shulman, 1972)

      Ultimately, the universal design idea is a utopian notion. This
      label “utopian” has both positive and negative connotations. On
      Edward Steinfeld
        and Beth Tauke   Universal Designing                                                  181
Buffalo, New York, USA



                         the one hand, it embraces idealism, the optimistic belief that
                         “yes, it can be accomplished – we can do it”. On the other hand,
                         it suggests impracticality, the impossibility of reaching a goal –
                         the naiveté of believing that “it could happen” and perhaps even
                         the inability to separate fantasy and reality.

                         Many university faculty are wary of utopian claims. They argue
                         that the term ‘universal’ is a specious and dangerous concept.
                         There has, after all, been an enormous amount of suffering and
                         waste in the world due to the adoption of universal solutions
                         and demise of pluralism. In fact, “universal design” is, accor-
                         ding to the experts “design for all people,” but, to the outsider,
                         the concept of “design for all” seems an impossibility.

                         Utopian ideas have a tendency toward absolutism. The term
                         “universal” itself, meaning “including or covering all or a
                         whole collectively or distributively without limit or exception”
                         (Hoad, 1992), conveys an abolutist agenda. One of us had a
                         high school teacher who told her class: “Be careful about using
                         absolute terms such as every, all, always, no, none, never – it is
                         difficult to support statements containing absolutes: All people
                         need love. No one benefits from violence in society. Usually,
                         this is the case, but there are exceptions. There are very few (if
                         any) instances of absolutes in our worlds. And absolute procla-
                         mations are dangerous because they tend to close the possibility
                         of critical examination.”

                         Every utopian notion creates skepticism in intellectual circles
                         because of the inherently exclusive nature of most ideologies
                         and groups espousing those ideologies. In the early days of its
                         evolution, those within the universal design discipline presented
                         it (whether intentional or not) with a kind of redemptive or sal-
                         vation approach. Either one had “seen the light of universal
                         design” or one was still “in the dark of form-driven design”.
                         Those who had “seen the light” were “saved” and it was their
                         obligation to enlighten the rest of the world – to spread the
                         word. Those who had not “seen the light” weren’t quite as
                         “good” as those who had.

                         Coupled with this is the natural tendency for proponents of a
                         utopian concept to dismiss other types of design explorations
                         that, because of different goals and agenda, do not embrace the
                         principles of the movement. To the outsider, much of the work
                         produced by other designers is, ipso facto, defined by the pro-
                         ponents of universal design as illegitimate (or not discussion-
182                        UNIVERSAL design   Part 2 North America




      worthy) because it doesn’t adhere to the stated Principles of
      Universal Design (Connel, et al., 1997). The Principles at
      times, act as barriers or dividers between “right” design and
      “wrong” design. When presented or perceived as a dichotomous
      choice, there are many other legitimate design enterprises that
      are de-legitimized: the work of those experimenting with form-
      driven environments that primarily are intended to challenge
      our preconceptions of spatial organizations and conditions, the
      work of phenomenologists who explore environments and pro-
      ducts with the intention of heightening our physical experien-
      ces, and even the work of proponents of sustainable design, a
      field that even shares the utopian perspective and whose practi-
      tioners are natural allies.

      Faculty who teach from these other perspectives often argue
      that the design of the material world should create physical
      challenges, a position diametrically opposed to the universal
      design principle of reducing effort and making them intuitive
      and simple to use. And, in fact, people do enjoy and value many
      activities that require added effort and cause inconvenience.
      Some examples are a devout woman whose faith is reinforced
      by the symbolism of pushing open of heavy church doors, a
      child who enjoys the strain of reaching to turn on the bathroom
      faucet while imagining that someday she’ll be big enough to
      turn it on by herself, or, the environmentalist who values the
      additional effort required to empty a composting toilet because
      it reduces environmental pollution.

      Also excluded are those whose work is intended to create dis-
      turbing and unsettling conditions for the sake of challenging
      social, cultural, political, and/or economic preconceptions and
      provoking critical reflection. Examples include Revington’s
      Luminous Veil Bridge Project in Toronto, which calls attention
      to the problem of suicide, parts of Jahn’s Chicago Stock
      Exchange in which the panic of potential market crash is incor-
      porated into the interior space of the building. These works
      seem quite inappropriate for the field of universal design – per-
      haps even antithetical to it. They don’t fit the definition or the
      mold that has been established, and, therefore, they are not con-
      sidered in the discourse. The problem? Although the intentions
      of universal design are inclusive, its structure is inherently
      exclusive; therefore, its practices contain contradictions.

      These barriers could prevent the discipline from adopting a set
      of critical perspectives and, ultimately, a critical practice – a
      Edward Steinfeld
        and Beth Tauke   Universal Designing                                                  183
Buffalo, New York, USA



                         practice that continually challenges and questions itself in order
                         to grow, a practice that considers other kinds of design and
                         other ways in which the physical world could shape our bodies,
                         minds, and spirits – a practice that considers various forms of
                         design education such as those structured to support difference
                         or to reveal the social construction of beliefs.

                         As noted above, utopian ideas have a positive side as well. The
                         three primary characteristics of a utopian idea are idealism,
                         change, and critique. All of these are positive attributes.
                         Although an absolute idealism can be naïve and inconsequen-
                         tial, an idealism tempered with pragmatism is what distinguis-
                         hes the mundane from the significant in design. Moreover, the
                         courage to take risks and search for new approaches, perspecti-
                         ves and solutions are attributes valued highly by most design
                         educators. Finally, and most importantly, utopian ideas emerge
                         from a critique of the status quo. When embraced thoughtlessly
                         with sloganeering and militancy, outsiders question the sincerity
                         of this critique. But, when adopted with considerable reflection
                         and articulated well, educators should respect it as a valid point
                         of departure for good design. Thus, universal design, as a uto-
                         pian construct, has the inherent qualities of a powerful design
                         philosophy, one that should be respected by other faculty.

                         Two utopian ideas, are particularly useful as a theoretical
                         framework for understanding and communicating universal
                         design in a positive sense as opposed to the negative. The first
                         of these is Sir Thomas More’s deliberate combination of the
                         Greek words eutopia (good place) and outopia (no place) to
                         generate the term utopia (More, 1975, originally published
                         1516). The second is Ruth Levitas’s contemporary description:

                           [u]topia is the expression of the desire for a better way of
                           being. This includes both the objective, institutional appro-
                           ach to utopia, and the subjective, experiential concern of dis-
                           alienation.… It allows for the form, function, and content to
                           change over time. And it reminds us that, whenever we think
                           of particular utopias, we learn a lot about the experience of
                           living under any set of conditions by reflecting upon the desi-
                           res which those conditions generate and yet leave unfulfilled.
                           For that is the space which utopia occupies. (Levitas, 1990)

                         More’s definition is place-dependent and Levitas’s is state-
                         dependent. More’s creates a space; Levitas’s fills it. The double
                         condition of More’s two aspects of utopia – good place, no
184                           UNIVERSAL design    Part 2 North America




      place – sets up the possibility of introducing Levitas’s view as a
      mediating device: the desired state is where ‘good place’ and
      ‘no place’ intersect.

      These ideas of utopia can help us understand the spaces, places,
      objects, images and events that are the results of universal
      design practice. The physical products and places of universal
      design, and their attendant psychological states, often articulate
      the dichotomy inherent in desire – the utopian ideal of ‘design
      for all’ and the reality of getting closer, but never reaching the
      goal.




      Utopian ideas help us to rethink and realize the seemingly impossible.
      Left: Parc des Buttes-Chaumont, Paris, France, Photo Beth Tauke
      Right: Tuno By, Denmark, Photo Beth Tauke.

      Places and products that have the characteristics of universal
      design are located cognitively somewhere between what is and
      what is desired. Thus, the desired place becomes a ‘substitute’
      place. This place of ‘design for all’ is asymptotic, namely, an
      approach between two conditions that continues to move forever
      closer, but that never achieves full merging or closure. This
      asymptotic condition of universal design does not completely ful-
      fill the promise of ‘design for all’ but forever attempts to close
      the gap through an increasingly informed practice of designing
      for a continually broadening and deepening population.

      The reflection required to pursue “an increasingly informed”
      state of consciousness is one form of critical practice. It is this
      reflective activity that has not been adequately communicated
      Edward Steinfeld
        and Beth Tauke   Universal Designing                                                  185
Buffalo, New York, USA



                         as a part of universal design practice. More emphasis on this
                         aspect of universal design will help to achieve validation of the
                         concept within both the academic disciplines and professions of
                         design. While emphasizing the positive connotations of utopian
                         thinking, it is also important to avoid reinforcing the negative.
                         Universal design educators can avoid espousing an idealism
                         that is obviously impractical. They can avoid an absolutist
                         stance that implies to one’s peers that their own work has little
                         value. And, they can embrace a real inclusiveness by adopting a
                         tolerance of other perspectives, even those that appear contrary
                         to the espoused Principles. Universal design educators can also
                         demonstrate the true sincerity of their devotion to inclusiveness
                         by expanding the sphere of their interests and activities beyond
                         disability to aging, gender issues, cultural differences, sustain-
                         ability and other issues that might emerge as cultures change.
                         This will not only inform the development of universal design
                         as a philosophical approach to design but also build bridges to
                         other faculty who share equally utopian perspectives.

                         Conclusion
                         Universal design education could be enriched significantly by
                         exploring and communicating the intellectual traditions that
                         underlay the concept, like the idea of reciprocity between social
                         life and material culture and the concept of social justice. Using
                         the group home as an example, we have demonstrated how the
                         concept of normalization has parallels in the theories of the
                         early feminist movement. This idea has significant implications
                         for curriculum and criticism, especially in the design studio. We
                         proposed that group homes could be studied as a form of co-
                         operative housekeeping. As a corollary example, the concept of
                         independence can be examined as a basis for the design of an
                         autonomous living unit, thereby making connections to the
                         sustainable design movement. No doubt there are many other
                         such connections and thus many other threads of intellectual
                         discourse that could inform our work.

                         A cultural critique can become part of all design projects. Too
                         often, design studio instructors give an assignment in the form
                         of a problem to solve without leaving room or encouraging a
                         redefinition of the problem itself. Yet, the most creative design
                         usually starts with such reflection. In reality, any assignment is
                         a program to question and critique, examining the relationship
                         between material culture and social life, studying the differing
                         social definitions of places or objects and comparing the
186                        UNIVERSAL design   Part 2 North America




      perspectives of the client, the designer and the user as “other”.
      The literature of disability studies can be an excellent source of
      ideas for such a critique. Some suggestions include:

      1. the impact of disability in public encounters and what is
         implied for the design of public places,
      2. perfection and deformity in aesthetic values and what they
         imply for fashions of taste and style,
      3. disability as a career and the implication for design for the
         lifespan,
      4. disability as “otherness” and its relationship with “marginal
         space”.

      The idea that universal design is an alternative to the rule based
      approach of barrier free design is another powerful educational
      strategy. Since there is much resistance to the rule based appro-
      ach among creative designers, it can be used as a foil to generate
      interest among students in its alternative. Since students need to
      know the rules they will have to follow when they enter practice,
      an assignment through which they have to study them and
      uncover their limitations and irrationalities may be a good intro-
      duction to universal design. From there, the underlying princi-
      ples of design behind the rules and others that are not even
      represented by the rules can be uncovered and students can be
      challenged to find better solutions than rule based design would
      generate. On the other hand, an exclusive focus on design by
      rules, such as using the ADA as a basis for universal design edu-
      cation, is likely to miss the whole point of the movement.

      Although pedagogy certainly should be the focus of universal
      design education, politics are as critical to the success of educa-
      tional ventures as the merit of pedagogy. Academia is a place
      where intense competition among ideas is a normal state of
      affairs. As advocates of universal design, we have to be prepa-
      red to persuade our colleagues and students of their intellectual
      value. The concept of universal design has many connotations
      that appeal to the values and perspectives of progressive acade-
      mic culture. These include a concern for human values, acti-
      vism, cultural pluralism and social justice. Yet, at the same time,
      universal design can have connotations that can engender suspi-
      cion and resistance by other faculty as well as students. These
      include the perception that universal design, as a utopian con-
      cept, has an absolute idealist agenda, an exclusionary structure
      and unrealistic goals.
      Edward Steinfeld
        and Beth Tauke   Universal Designing                                                     187
Buffalo, New York, USA



                         These negative connotations, however, can be overcome with a
                         focus on the intellectual traditions to which universal design is
                         linked and by insuring an open, critical perspective in peda-
                         gogy. We especially need to emphasize the idealism inherent in
                         the concept and, to avoid the perception of naiveté, we need to
                         emphasize that universal design is a search for ways to “close
                         the gap” between the utopian ideal and the current status quo.
                         The ideal of universal design may be more palatable when pre-
                         sented as a touchstone against which we try out various ideas
                         about our ways of living in the world. In this way, the strengths
                         and dilemmas of universal design are used to help us see what
                         we are without prescribing what we should be. We can use its
                         processes, products, and environments to actively participate in
                         the unending debate about human nature and the best possible
                         evolution of society. In fact, we prefer to use the term universal




                         Universal design is socially integrating, functional for everyone and
                         inspiring as well. Above – Bara Funda, Sao Paulo, Oscar Niemeyer,
                         Architect, Photo: Edward Steinfeld
                         Below – Tribeca Bridge, New York, Photo: Edward Steinfeld.
188                        UNIVERSAL design   Part 2 North America




      designing, a verb rather than a noun, because the verb form puts
      the emphasis on going there, rather than getting there.

      Reflective thinking should be the norm of universal design edu-
      cation, emphasizing the critical stance that brought it into being
      in the first place. We need to practice an inclusive intellectual
      discourse by acknowledging connections to other perspectives
      in education and design, in particular, those that share a utopian
      character, emphasize the value of diversity and encourage a per-
      son-centered design practice. And, we need to be tolerant of
      other, more divergent educational perspectives, recognizing that
      there is a place for many viewpoints in design education.


      References
      American National Standards Institute (1961). A117.1 Making
         Buildings and Facilities Accessible to the Physically
         Handicapped. American National Standards Institute. New
         York 1961.
      Berkowitz, E.D. Disabled Policy. Cambridge University Press.
         Cambridge. 1987.
      Cooley, C. H. The looking glass self. Human Nature and the
         Social Order. pp. 179–185. Scribner’s. New York 1902.
      Connell, B.R., Jones, M., Mace, R., Mueller, J., Mullick, A.,
         Ostroff, E., Sanford, J., Steinfeld, E., Story, M. and
         Vanderheiden, G. The Principles of Universal Design. Center
         for Universal Design, North Carolina State University.
         Raleigh, NC 1997.
      Goldman, E. Socialism: caught in the political trap. Shulman,
         A.K (ed). Red Emma Speaks. New York: Random House.
         (c. 1912, first published 1972).
      Harvey, D. The Condition of Postmodernity. Blackwell.
         Cambridge, MA. 1989.
      Hayden, D. The Grand Domestic Revolution. MIT Press.
         Cambridge, MA. 1981.
      Hiller, T. and Hanson, J. The Social Logic of Space. Cambridge
         University Press. Cambridge 1984.
      International Code Council ICC/ANSI A117.1 Accessible and
         Usable Buildings and Facilities. International Code Council.
         Falls Church, VA 1998.
      Hoad, T. F., ed. The Concise Oxford Dictionary of English
         Etymology. Oxford University Press. Oxford, UK: 518. 1992.
      Levitas, R. The Concept of Utopia. p.8. Hemel Hempstead,
         Philip Allan,. UK: 1990.
      Edward Steinfeld
        and Beth Tauke   Universal Designing                                               189
Buffalo, New York, USA




                         Mead, G. H. Ed. Charles W. Morris. Mind Self and Society.
                            University. of Chicago Press. Chicago. 1934.
                         More, T. Utopia: a new translation, backgrounds, criticism.
                            New York: Norton. 1975, first published in Latin, 1516.
                         Rothman, D. The Discovery of the Asylum. Boston, MA: Little
                            Brown. 1971.
                         Ritzer, G. The McDonaldization of Society. Pine Forge Press.
                            Newbury Park, CA. 2000.
                         Steinfeld, E. Major issues in developing building standards, in
                            Michael Bednars, (Ed.), Barrier-Free Environments.
                            Dowden, Hutchinson and Ross. Stroudsburg, PA: 1977.
                         U.S. Access Board. Americans with Disabilities Act
                            Architectural Guidelines, Washington: U.S. Access Board.
                            1984
                         U.S. General Accounting Office Report to Congress: Further
                            Action Needed to Make All Public Buildings Accessible to the
                            Physically Handicapped. Washington, DC: GAO. 1975.
                         Weber, M. Trans. Economy and Society. Bedminster Press.
                            New York. 1968.
                         Wolfensberger, W. The Principle of Normalization in Human
                            Services. National Institute on Mental Retardation.
                            Toronto.1972.
                         Wijk, Maarten. Differences We Share. Delft, Netherlands:
                            Faculty of Architecture, Delft University of Technology.
                            Delft. 1997.
190   UNIVERSAL design   Part 2 North America




                                                Photo: FotoKnutsen AS
Polly Welch and Stanton Jones
          University of Oregon   An Opportunity for Critical Discourse in Design Education              191
                           USA




                                 2.2 An Opportunity for
                                 Critical Discourse in
                                 Design Education
                                 Polly Welch, Associate Professor, Department of Architecture,
                                 University of Oregon.
                                 Stanton Jones, Associate Professor, Department of Landscape
                                 Architecture, University of Oregon, USA


                                 Background
                                 Universal design education in the United States has been foste-
                                 red and documented primarily through the leadership of Elaine
                                 Ostroff, who developed the Universal Design Education Project
                                 (UDEP) in 1989, the first funded program in universal design
                                 curriculum development. Case studies from the project’s
                                 twenty-two participating schools (Welch, 1995; 2000) present a
                                 range of approaches and materials across four design fields –
                                 architecture, landscape architecture, interior design and product
                                 design. These teaching examples illustrate substantial differen-
                                 ces in operative definitions of universal design and pedagogical
                                 philosophies and illuminate the exploration of an emergent
                                 definition of universal design as «good design». While adoption
                                 of universal design values has been slow among most design
                                 faculties in the Unites States, instructors and students in interior
                                 design and product design have been more receptive to this shift
                                 in thinking than those in architecture and landscape architec-
                                 ture. This chapter describes the experience of two professors in
                                 these latter disciplines who use universal design as a vehicle for
                                 critical discourse in their design teaching.

                                 The authors, as University of Oregon faculty, were selected in
                                 the second round of Universal Design Education Project
                                 (UDEP) funding for teaching innovations and had the opportu-
                                 nity to build on the experiences of the first round of schools.
                                 The strategies employed by the authors in teaching universal
                                 design are also influenced by their prior professional experien-
                                 ces as well as the specific contexts of their departments and dis-
                                 ciplines.
192                         UNIVERSAL design   Part 2 North America




      The design disciplines at the University of Oregon, housed in
      the School of Architecture and Allied Arts, include Landscape
      Architecture, Architecture, Interior Architecture, Planning, Fine
      Arts, Art History, Arts and Administration, and Historic
      Preservation. While the authors are the only design faculty who
      explicitly teach the application of universal design values to
      design students, their thinking has been significantly influenced
      by two professors in Arts and Administration and Fine Arts,
      whose practice and teaching challenges traditional knowledge
      paradigms regarding culture, class, gender and ability.

      The Architecture department and its program in Interior
      Architecture offer both undergraduate and graduate degrees.
      The department has a long history of a humanistic, non-compe-
      titive curriculum that currently attracts students for its strengths
      in regionalism, sustainability, and building craft and technology.
      The Landscape Architecture program, also serving graduates
      and undergraduates, has a reputation for its strength in land-
      scape ecology, history and design technologies.

      Ideals and objectives: Main Themes
      Several important themes inform the approach taken to teaching
      the value of universal design at the University of Oregon. First,
      universal design is a value that establishes a quality of relationship
      between people and designed environments or physical objects,
      based on an inclusive definition of users and the potential of the
      built environment to empower and enable users. It is related to, by
      virtue of history, but not synonymous with, the disability-focussed
      terms accessible design, barrier free design and adaptable design
      or, in the United States, design that complies with the require-
      ments of the American with Disabilities Act. Because universal
      design was first conceived by accessibility advocates in the disabi-
      lity movement, the idea was framed initially with a disability con-
      struct of design issues. In 1998 Ronald Mace supplemented his
      original definition of universal design (1991), by emphatically sta-
      ting that «[universal design’s] focus is not specifically on people
      with disabilities, but all people» (1998).

      The Seven Principles of Universal Design Project (see main
      Appendix 1) has helped to explain universal design by prescri-
      bing some of its essential physical characteristics and cognitive
      qualities. The Universal Design Exemplars Projects ii built on the
      Seven Principles and gathered visual examples of universal
      design applications to real places and useful objects. Each effort
Polly Welch and Stanton Jones
          University of Oregon   An Opportunity for Critical Discourse in Design Education             193
                           USA



                                 to codify the characteristics of universal design has wrestled with
                                 the residual notion that it serves primarily people with disabili-
                                 ties, and, secondarily, meets the needs of others. These projects
                                 offer practitioners, teachers and scholars important resources for
                                 launching an ongoing discourse about the practical applications
                                 of universal design and the merits of designing inclusively.

                                 Secondly, the civil rights principle that serves as the legal foun-
                                 dation of the American with Disabilities Act (ADA) – that
                                 people with disabilities have the same rights to use and enjoy
                                 the built environment as everyone else – is an important aspect
                                 of teaching universal design. The notion that civil rights extend
                                 to the allocation and utilization of physical space is not new.
                                 African Americans and women, among others, have had to
                                 challenge spatial practices that either unduly separated them or
                                 ignored their existence altogether (Weisman 1992; Grant 1996).
                                 There are important teaching opportunities in examining the
                                 parallels and provoking critical insights about the nature of
                                 equity in design. Landscape architects and architects have gene-
                                 rally ignored their role in shaping the environment as an oppor-
                                 tunity for fostering social justice (Jones 1996, 1998) and their
                                 agency in reinforcing stereotypes through their designs (Welch
                                 and Jones, 1999).

                                 Third, if universal design is a value that addresses the needs of
                                 all users, as Mace asserted (1998), then its application must
                                 recognize that many individual users have multiple identities.
                                 Universal design has typically been extended from being a
                                 disability issue to being a lifespan issue. Design concerns have
                                 extended most easily from disability issues to the needs of old
                                 people because the aging population shares characteristics of
                                 diminished mobility and stamina, sensory limitations and the
                                 need for assistive technology. «Lifespan» therefore has been
                                 interpreted by many faculty and practitioners as focussing on the
                                 latter half of life when users’ relationships to the environment
                                 are similar to those of people with disabilities. Consideration of
                                 small children has been largely overlooked except for differen-
                                 ces in stature. Teenagers, as is their common fate in the U.S., are
                                 largely ignored. Cognitive and developmental needs of children
                                 and adolescents may be in direct conflict with some universal
                                 design principles. For example, the lever door handle is now a
                                 ubiquitous example of universal design but under certain circum-
                                 stances its benefits of «low physical effort» (Principle Six) iii
                                 may be outweighed by its lack of «tolerance for error» (Principle
                                 Five) when small children are present. (see Figure 1)
194                            UNIVERSAL design     Part 2 North America




      Fig. 1. The child’s safety gate illustrates the need for further development
      of the lever door handle to be fully universal in a family housing setting.


      If universal design recognizes that most individuals have
      multiple facets of identities, that is, people also characterize
      themselves in relation to race, class, gender, ethnicity, physical
      size and sexuality, then the design strategies need to reflect that
      greater complexity. An old person’s interaction with the envi-
      ronment may be equally a factor of her ethnic traditions, espe-
      cially family structure and gender expectations, as her
      diminishing energy and sensory ability. A mother who uses a
      wheelchair may find raising children alone to be challenging in
      new ways when negotiating the places that parents and children
Polly Welch and Stanton Jones
          University of Oregon   An Opportunity for Critical Discourse in Design Education            195
                           USA



                                 frequent. Recognizing multiple facets of identity is especially
                                 important in framing environmental design decisions at the
                                 larger scales of buildings, landscapes, and communities (Welch
                                 and Jones 2001c) where the environment may provide fewer
                                 individual affordances and individuals collectively make a
                                 broader array of demands on the place.

                                 The field of environment-behavior studies has been a source of
                                 research-based information on the needs of specific user groups
                                 – elderly people, people with disabilities, hospital patients,
                                 office workers, low income families, pedestrians, and museum
                                 visitors, to name a few. The taxonomy that has evolved over
                                 time for identifying user groups has hardly been systematic and
                                 often labels groups of people by their shared experience as
                                 occupants of a building or place type. The literature tends to
                                 convey homogenous, typical users whose environmental beha-
                                 viors and needs are generic to the group being described and
                                 seldom address the implications of other facets of identity. The
                                 literature is an important resource for understanding one facet
                                 of identity but it is only partially informative unless it is com-
                                 plemented by input from real users with real, complex identities
                                 and needs.

                                 User consultants have been found to be one of the most effec-
                                 tive strategies for teaching universal design values (Lifchez
                                 1987; Welch 1996; Ostroff 1997). Design education in the
                                 United States generally does not value the perspective of non-
                                 designers in teaching design and schools generally have such
                                 limited diversity of students and faculty that the perspectives of
                                 the school population may not be sufficiently representative.
                                 While Lifchez invited people with physical disabilities to be
                                 ongoing clients for his students, most of the UDEP schools
                                 asked users consultants to visit studio reviews and provide feed-
                                 back on students’ proposed designs. Users who are able to arti-
                                 culate their day-to-day experiences in the built environment can
                                 give students insights into their proposed design that is both
                                 memorable and interrogative, enhancing the likelihood of the
                                 student gaining a critical perspective. The UDEP students had
                                 varied reactions: «some students experienced disbelief and
                                 outrage at the indignity of the misfit between people and the
                                 environment; some felt like inadvertent accomplices in their
                                 profession’s careless attitudes; others remained skeptical that
                                 design could possibly respond to the range of issues that users
                                 present.» (Welch 1995, 254). This range of responses reflects
196                         UNIVERSAL design     Part 2 North America




      yet another opportunity to engage students in critiquing the role
      of design in addressing the needs of multiple, diverse users.

      Fourth, universal design has a greater likelihood of being incor-
      porated into students’ thinking and design work if the value is
      infused into all aspects of teaching rather than taught as stand-
      alone subject matter (Welch 1995). The single subject matter
      course called «Universal Design» was noted by some UDEP
      faculty for sending the message that universal design is another
      skill to be learned and applied, and risks losing sight of its lar-
      ger value as contextual, critical exploration of the fit between
      people and design. Infusing universal design across the curricu-
      lum has been tried in a number of UDEP schools where faculty
      inserts materials and exercises into a variety of courses and
      levels of design studiosiv. A more subtle effort at infusion was
      the meeting of faculty at Buffalo to discuss what universal
      design really meant to the teaching of design (Adaptive
      Environments 1996). In this venue, not only were the faculty (a
      mix of adopters and non-adopters, I believe) asked to actively
      and critically consider how to reflect universal design values in
      design teaching but each learned more about it in the process.
      «Infusion diminishes the potentially marginal status of the
      course content and introduces new discourse by challenging
      ableist, gendered, classist, eurocentric course content.» (Welch
      and Jones, 2000)

      Fifth, for students to develop a complete and operational under-
      standing of universal design requires a variety of curricular con-
      tent. Five components are critical for students to move from
      general awareness to engagement and ultimately, integration,
      the ability to design inclusively (Welch and Jones 2001b):

      –   Technical data
      –   User needs research
      –   User involvement
      –   Self awareness
      –   Ethical and political considerations
Polly Welch and Stanton Jones
          University of Oregon   An Opportunity for Critical Discourse in Design Education               197
                           USA




                                 Fig. 2. Model for development of curriculum content (Welch and Jones,
                                 2001b)



                                 And finally, teaching universal design is an opportunity to
                                 increase critical discourse in design training. Most curricular
                                 material on accommodating people with disabilities has, to
                                 date, been presented as technical in nature – the slope of a
                                 ramp, the width of a door, the layout of a bathroom. When
                                 accessibility requirements are presented in the context of buil-
                                 ding code, students too rarely question the origin or reliability
                                 of the information nor are they inclined to imagine equivalent
                                 or enhanced alternatives to the requirements. When universal
                                 design is presented primarily through exemplars it can have the
                                 same effect on students. They are inclined to replicate what they
                                 have seen but not able to generate new inclusive solutions.
                                 Critical analysis of whose needs are addressed by universally
                                 designed places and objects seems to help internalize the value.
                                 To engage students in examining the values inherent in their
                                 training – the «truths» by which their professions judge design
                                 – and the degree of inclusivity in the precedents they select to
                                 emulate, encourages a critical perspective that can profoundly
                                 impact their world view and design aspirations. Needless to say,
                                 this type of critical assessment of built places is largely missing
                                 from both trade journals and scholarly journals in architecture
                                 and landscape architecture, leaving instructors to develop their
                                 own original materials.

                                 Strategies
                                 The primary focus of the Oregon faculty has been twofold:
                                 exploring the nature of infusion and the implications of univer-
                                 sal design as a design value rather than technical knowledge
198                         UNIVERSAL design   Part 2 North America




      (Welch 2000). Over the course of five years the following stra-
      tegies for incorporating universal design values into the many
      realms of intellectual interaction with students and colleagues
      have been explored:

      – Creating a smorgasbrod of universal design teaching mate-
        rials that other faculty could incorporate into their classes
      – A weekend workshop focussed on environmental equity
      – Infusing readings, exercises and images into a variety of
        subject matter courses.
      – Design studios that foster inclusive planning and design values

      The Oregon UDEP grant proposed to infuse the entire environ-
      mental design curriculum by offering faculty a variety of curricu-
      lar materials about universal design that they could insert directly
      into their teaching or merge with existing materials. The authors
      selected History/Theory courses for the first effort at infusion
      because those professors were probably not familiar with univer-
      sal design, were engaging students in critical discourse, seemed
      to be likely potential adopters, and their involvement in testing
      universal design teaching materials would stimulate useful dis-
      cussion. History, theory, criticism courses generally establish for
      the design student a repetoire of historical precedents from which
      to draw aesthetic vocabulary and design inspiration. Many of the
      images to which students are exposed in these courses represent
      the exclusive values of a dominant culture, perpetuation of social
      stereotypes and stigmas, and assumptions about appropriate use,
      often without critical commentary. The UDEP faculty believed
      that its universal design materials would encourage faculty to cri-
      tique these precedents from multiple perspectives and offer addi-
      tional images and information that might provoke discussion and
      critical investigation.

      For a variety of reasons the history/theory faculty were not tea-
      ching during the initial UDEP grant period. So a letter was sent
      to all faculty in both landscape architecture and architecture,
      describing the UDEP grant and the universal design resources
      available to them, with the expectation that some of them might
      be willing to be early adopters. No interest was forthcoming,
      not even a hallway conversation. The UDEP faculty shifted to
      testing the resource library themselves – a bibliography of rea-
      dings and videos, and a slide collection of universal design
      exemplars. Each UDEP instructor had introduced universal
      design into coursework at least as a lecture and all four were
      experimenting with exercises that would reinforce the impor-
Polly Welch and Stanton Jones
          University of Oregon   An Opportunity for Critical Discourse in Design Education             199
                           USA



                                 tance of universal design to the subject matter of their courses.
                                 In hindsight, the internal team dialogue and values development
                                 was a critical precursor to showing other faculty how universal
                                 design values could be a pedagogical nexus of their teaching.

                                 An opportunity to match the UDEP grant with internal univer-
                                 sity funding presented itself. The call for an event that would
                                 have relevance and appeal for students and faculty from all
                                 departments in the school made possible expanding the propo-
                                 sed UDEP event from a «talking heads» presentation on univer-
                                 sal design to an event that would address inclusivity in the arts.

                                 Power and Place: A weekend workshop
                                 to explore attitudes
                                 To raise awareness and provide an opportunity for students to
                                 engage universal design, outside the curriculum, the faculty
                                 team planned a weekend event, titled Power and Place. The
                                 intent was to provide a participatory experience that would
                                 engage simultaneously students’ empathy, their critical thin-
                                 king, and their creativity. A focus on art installations was selec-
                                 ted over the more typical design intervention workshops that
                                 had been used at other UDEP sites, to make this workshop
                                 experience distinct from the problem-solving realm in which
                                 students are already being well trained. In particular the organi-
                                 zers wanted to clearly differentiate this event from a diagnostic
                                 effort to make the university campus accessible. The workshop
                                 structure and outcome were designed as an opportunity for
                                 social critique through creative expression that would be trans-
                                 formative for the students and might provoke commentary,
                                 engagement and response by passersby and possibly the com-
                                 munity at large. The event was preceded by a presentation by
                                 Barbara Krueger, internationally recognized installation artist,
                                 who spoke about how she constructs visual commentary on
                                 socially controversial issues.

                                 The UDEP faculty team comprising four design disciplines –
                                 architecture, interior architecture, landscape architecture, and
                                 arts and administration – planned a forum for students to exa-
                                 mine their attitudes and feelings about people different from
                                 themselves, through the lens of power and inclusion. Students
                                 were invited to explore their own exclusion experiences, listen
                                 to others’, and jointly imagine and construct an art installation
                                 to reflect their shared understanding of how the university envi-
                                 ronment supported inclusion.
200                        UNIVERSAL design   Part 2 North America




      Four nationally recognized advocatesv for inclusive design pre-
      sented examples of their work as an initial framework for dis-
      cussion and subsequently worked closely with design teams,
      answering questions and sharing critical perspectives. Universal
      design was mentioned a number of times by different presenters
      as an important value. It was not the goal of the weekend, per
      se, and yet, when completed the participants had learned a great
      deal about including a variety of people in their design conside-
      rations.

      The faculty developed a sequence of personal and group activi-
      ties to assist participants in uncovering for themselves the mea-
      ning of “inclusive” or “universal” design. Participants began the
      workshop by working together in small groups to identify and
      share their own experiences with respect to personal stereotypes
      and exclusion. They were asked to brainstorm responses to
      three questions:

      1. What part of your ignorance do you hope to address through
         your participation in the workshop?
      2. In what ways have you personally experienced the environ-
         ment as a barrier?
      3. Define as a group, “inclusive design” and “inclusive place.”

      The resulting dialogues between individuals and across discipli-
      nes raised challenging questions for participants about their
      personal assumptions, the stereotypes implicit in their educa-
      tion, and the relative absence of discourse on ethical issues in
      their professions.

      No single building on campus was sufficiently accessible and
      inclusive of the wide range of participant needs to house all of
      the weekend’s events. The change in venues became an oppor-
      tunity for kinesthetic, experiential learning about spatial accom-
      modation. Participants formed teams that were assigned a new
      «identity» that would impact how they moved through space.
      This movement exercise, facilitated by a member of the Dance
      Department, afforded each participant the opportunity to heigh-
      ten their own awareness of the environment around them in
      relation to their own bodies and to the movements of others.
      One assignment, for example, was: “Be sensitive to the uni-
      queness of each environment you pass through. Use all of your
      faculties to fill the spaces.” One group of students joined hands
      to reach from wall to wall and filled multi-height spaces with
Polly Welch and Stanton Jones
          University of Oregon   An Opportunity for Critical Discourse in Design Education           201
                           USA



                                 the sounds of their voices. Another assignment asked students
                                 to maintain contact with an edge at all times, drawing them off
                                 the planned pathways and requiring them to negotiate spaces
                                 and materials not planned for circulation.

                                 The movement exercise was intended to encourage participants
                                 to look at very familiar places and pathways in a new way and
                                 to suspend visual and analytical judgments temporarily while
                                 experiencing space differently. Considerable thought went into
                                 planning an experiential exercise that would be as engaging as
                                 the popular empathic techniques of trying out a wheelchair or
                                 wearing a blindfold, while avoiding the pitfalls of misrepresen-
                                 tation that come with momentarily simulating the experience of
                                 being blind or paralyzed. (Welch 1995)

                                 Following this exercise, the teams were given their weekend
                                 assignment – to brainstorm and develop ideas for the creation
                                 of an art installation on the university grounds, that would pro-
                                 mote public awareness of the University’s commitment to inclu-
                                 sivity, especially as expressed within the public realm of the
                                 campus. The problem statement was «to explore and express, in
                                 a non-competitive workshop environment, the inclusivity com-
                                 mitments of the University as described in the tagline that appe-
                                 ars at the bottom of every university document: «An equal
                                 opportunity, affirmative action institution committed to cultural
                                 diversity and compliance with the Americans with Disabilities
                                 Act.» While many participants had assumed that this legal state-
                                 ment of inclusivity was focused on employment and administra-
                                 tive practices, it quickly became clear to the participants that
                                 this statement could, and in fact did, have implications for the
                                 built environment. With recent political and judicial decisions
                                 threatening the future of affirmative action, a growing disparity
                                 between «haves» and «have-nots» in American society, and the
                                 global increase in social and cultural balkanization, critical
                                 exploration of these issues seemed timely.

                                 The groups were consciously organized to ensure an interdisci-
                                 plinary mix of students and community membersvi because stu-
                                 dent assistants insisted that participants would form
                                 homogenous teams if given the chance. The invited panelists
                                 were available to the teams for consultation and inspiration
                                 throughout the entire day as they crafted their installations.
                                 Each group had a small budget for purchasing materials and
                                 access to a truck to obtain whatever the group needed to imple-
                                 ment its idea. Many of the selected materials had been recycled
202                           UNIVERSAL design   Part 2 North America




      from other student projects or were obtained from a local re-
      cycling center.

      At the end of the weekend, workshop participants, community
      members, and curious bystanders gathered for a tour and pre-
      sentation of the seven installations. While most of the instal-
      lations were constructed as objects or sequences of objects that
      could have been placed anywhere on campus, at least one was a
      response to a specific university symbol, a statue of The
      Pioneer, prominently located in front of the administration buil-
      ding. The Pioneer, visible from the main road through campus,
      had been wrapped in paper. Another statue, The Pioneer
      Mother, situated in a copse of trees and not very visible from
      campus circulation routes, was strung with wind chimes. The
      student artists commented:

          We wanted to call out the differences in where these statues
          were located, who saw them, and whom they saw. There are
          many connections here. An act of architecture was placed
          between them... inaccessible architecture... We weren’t just
          talking about gender, but about who represents the school...
          Even when the wrapping is gone, people can walk by and
          remember that there was wrapping.




      Fig. 3. The Pioneer statue wrapped in paper.
Polly Welch and Stanton Jones
          University of Oregon   An Opportunity for Critical Discourse in Design Education           203
                           USA



                                 The Table installation was located on a plaza in front of the
                                 Business School. Wind chimes made from pots, pans and eating
                                 utensils hung at the corners of the plaza to draw people to the
                                 site. An old kitchen table with six place settings and different
                                 types of chairs was placed in the center of the plaza. A reflec-
                                 tive was tied to each chair balloon at approximately head
                                 height. Clothes and accoutrements that represented people with
                                 different facets of identity were arranged at the place settings.




                                 Fig. 4. The Table Installation.
204                        UNIVERSAL design   Part 2 North America




      The group’s posted commentary read, in part:

        “Sitting at a table is a social activity.
        It may be for a meal or a political negotiation.
        The table creates intimacy as well as separation.
        Where and how you are seated symbolizes your status,
        authority and power.
        The location of your place at the table defines you.
        Sometimes the location of your table defines you.
        You are where you sit; you are where you are seated; you are
        how you sit.
        You are where you eat; you are where you speak; you are
        your visibility; you are how you get there.

         You can......leave the table
         or...............upturn the table
         change.......the shape of the table
         change.......the shape of the seating at the table
         change.......the ideas of the people at the table

         Think about your ideal table.
         Think about your place at the table now, and where you
         would like to sit tomorrow.
         Expand your thinking.”

         “Our intention is to create a place where stereotypes and
         assumptions are not an issue. ‘We are able at the table.’

      Participants’ written reflections over the subsequent months
      described a sense of empowerment and engagement that
      directly impacted their work and their lives. The workshop rein-
      forced the importance of addressing attitudes by combining
      empathy and creativity in the search for inclusive design.
      (Welch and Jones 1998)

      This workshop was primarily an exploration into an alternative
      pedagogy, one that could address the fundamental role of atti-
      tudes and awareness of others’ needs in placemaking. By raising
      participants’ awareness of inclusiveness and providing an oppor-
      tunity to implement their insights, participants appeared to have
      become more receptive to and interested in acquiring the know-
      ledge needed to support these values in the design process. The
      participants, however, needed opportunities to follow up on new
      sensibilities that they had developed in the workshop. The shift
      from awareness to critique and implementation requires more
Polly Welch and Stanton Jones
          University of Oregon   An Opportunity for Critical Discourse in Design Education               205
                           USA



                                 than three short days. Three years later, participants continue to
                                 comment on the essential value of this experience in their per-
                                 sonal and professional development. A few have independently
                                 pursued more in-depth work on universal design values; many
                                 have been frustrated by the absence of further opportunities in
                                 the curriculum for further discourse and development and
                                 assume that they can re-engage their new found sensibilities
                                 when they move on to practice.

                                 While these kind of events increase both visibility and partici-
                                 pation, and can attract funding to sustain universal design tea-
                                 ching and research, they are also extremely time consuming and
                                 place an enormous burden on individual faculty in terms of
                                 planning, coordination and implementation.

                                 Infusion of inclusive design values into
                                 existing classes
                                 Teaching the values of universal design requires more than adding
                                 another content area to the curriculum and introducing more
                                 knowledge for the student to assimilate. To be most effective uni-
                                 versal design needs to be taught as a critique about the values
                                 underlying the way designers plan and shape environments.

                                 First, the instructors had to confront the students’ confusion
                                 about the difference between universal design and accessibility,
                                 reflecting the inadequacy of instruction on access codes. Design
                                 faculty tacitly assumes that code instruction is every instructor’s
                                 responsibility so students’ awareness depends on whatever
                                 information an instructor chooses to pass on in studio reviews.
                                 There is no specific area of the design curriculum that systema-
                                 tically covers accessibility codes in detail. It is unlikely that the
                                 rationale behind an access feature, such as the danger of protru-
                                 ding objects, is covered anywhere in the curriculum. Many stu-
                                 dents have expressed an interest in a coherent presentation on
                                 accessibility codes. If universal design is different from accessi-
                                 bility why does it matter what students know about accessibi-
                                 lity? One strategy was to use students’ awareness of the
                                 accessibility codes to explain the need for, the genesis of, and
                                 the long-term value of universal design. More recently, as de-
                                 scribed below, the strategy has evolved to addressing universal
                                 design as an approach to achieving good design, quite separa-
                                 tely from achieving accessibility.

                                 Infusing universal design into teaching also needs to address
206                         UNIVERSAL design   Part 2 North America




      process as well as substance. Systematic use of word
      slides/overheads reinforcing concepts and terminology aids
      non-auditory learners as well as students whose native language
      differs from that of the instructor. In a studio setting, including
      non-designers at reviews supports universal design by valuing
      the importance of multiple perspectives. Encouraging students
      to present their design work so that the ideas are intelligible to
      non-designers reinforces how universal design impacts design
      communication traditions.

      Stan Jones incorporated universal design concepts into his Land
      as Media course five years ago. A technical course designed to
      teach students the basics of contour manipulation and storm
      water management, Jones challenges his students to consistently
      address, in all of the course assignments, the many social factors
      inherent within the design of built landscapes. He also expects
      them to evaluate all of their design work – both in his course and
      in other concurrent classes – in terms of “who is included?” and
      “who is excluded?” by design decisions. Jones includes a lecture
      on universal design and the ADA and occasionally uses empa-
      thic exercises accompanied by in-depth discussions by people
      with disabilities midway through the term. By linking social
      factors to the technical embedded in every design action they
      undertake, Jones’ course helps students to design inclusive envi-
      ronments that are both technically sound and socially just.

      Polly Welch, in Human Context of Design, a required course for
      all architecture students, scrutinizes each lecture for opportuni-
      ties to critique accepted knowledge from the perspectives of
      alternative perspectives such as race, class, gender, culture and
      ability. She uses case studies and contradictory readings to
      demonstrate that prevailing wisdom can be challenged, interro-
      gated, and supplemented by materials that include the perspecti-
      ves of those who have been traditionally invisible and voiceless
      in the design of the built environment. For example, she has
      developed a discussion on building codes, regulations, and
      zoning laws as instruments of social priorities. She encourages
      students to examine the purpose of segregating land uses in
      zoning, the assumptions about human behavior in traditional
      fire codes, and the attitudes about people with disabilities
      reflected historically and recently in accessibility regulations.

      To encourage students to think critically, Welch first asks them
      to reflect on their life experiences of being different. The «Who
      am I « worksheet, adapted from University of California at
Polly Welch and Stanton Jones
          University of Oregon   An Opportunity for Critical Discourse in Design Education               207
                           USA



                                 Berkeley’s diversity training, lists various social identities inclu-
                                 ding race, religion, culture, sexual orientation, ability/disability,
                                 gender, ethnicity and class. Students reflect on the extent to
                                 which they are aware of the various parts of their identity:
                                 – how they learned about that identity: under what circumstan-
                                   ces they are most aware of that identity, have felt different,
                                   excluded or vulnerable;
                                 – how they celebrate that identity; and
                                 – what they have felt witnessing others being stereotyped or
                                   excluded.

                                 White, able-bodied men, in particular, who are tired of being
                                 seen as perpetrators «rediscover» facets of their identity, often-
                                 times invisible, that have exposed them to the experience of
                                 being different in their childhood or adolescence. Dutton (1991)
                                 points out in his chapter on the hidden curriculum, the enor-
                                 mous meaning and power of knowledge when it is constructed
                                 from the real experiences of students – their «lifelines».

                                 This exercise precedes short student papers where they are
                                 asked to respond to topics such as:
                                 • Social Diversity and Architecture: Think about who is well
                                   represented and underrepresented in the professions of archi-
                                   tecture and interior architecture, on the faculty and curricu-
                                   lum of design programs, and among the clients who employ
                                   architects. Does it matter? How do we connect with a profes-
                                   sion that has been historically elitist in nature? What are our
                                   responsibilities to be inclusive and what do we need to act
                                   and think inclusively?
                                 • Making Socially Responsible Places: What can architects do
                                   to design socially responsible places? What aspects of design
                                   can reflect the designers’ social awareness and sensitivity?

                                 Welch assigns two projects for students to learn more about
                                 someone else’s experience of the built environment.
                                 - Students interview a person different from themselves to learn
                                 how well the built environment meets that person’s needs.
                                 - Students select a facet of identity that would lead to a different
                                 experience of the built environment and research what issues
                                 designers should take into consideration.
                                 Students tend to pick commonly identified identities like blind-
                                 ness but a significant number use the opportunity to think
                                 broadly and contribute perspectives that are often overlooked by
                                 designers: carlessness, pregnancy, left handedness, colorblind-
                                 ness, and panic disorder.
208                        UNIVERSAL design   Part 2 North America




      Each student conducts a term long assignment to conduct an
      environment-behavior analysis of a public place and make
      recommendations for improving it. One lens they are asked to
      use in their formal observations is who occupies the place and
      who is absent. They critique this along with other data to deter-
      mine why some places are more inclusive than others. At the
      end of nine weeks Welch’s students demonstrate their under-
      standing of environment-behavior concepts, including universal
      design, by showing how they have incorporated them into the
      design projects they have worked on in their studios.

      In the course, Housing and Society, Welch uses housing as a
      vehicle for examining how the planning and design professions
      address social, economic and political issues. She gives a
      design problem that asks students to design a unit of housing
      that can be lived in over forty years of a household’s transfor-
      mations. Emerging demographics point to the need for archi-
      tects to design housing that responds to new American
      household configurations. Among these trends are women bea-
      ring children at an older age, dual worker families, a fifty per-
      cent divorce rate, blended families (second marriages between
      people with children from previous marriages), the likelihood
      of some family member having a temporary or permanent dis-
      ability, increases in life expectancy and the majority of older
      people wanting to stay out of institutions and to grow old in
      their homes.

      Stage 1: Starter House for Young Couple – Year One
      Stage 2: Divorced Single Mother with Two Young Children –
               Year Ten
      Stage 3: Blended Family with Four Children – Year Twenty
      Stage 4: Older Couple with Aging Parent – Year Thirty
      Stage 5: Growing Old at Home – Year Forty

      The purpose is to challenge the U.S. notion that every change in
      household makeup requires a new living environment. Most of
      the changes needed by the different household configurations
      can be accommodated by design strategies that anticipate and
      provide options for a variety of different life circumstances.

      Design studio problems that foster
      inclusive planning and design values
      Another strategy for embedding universal design into design
      education is to assign design studio problems that require a cri-
Polly Welch and Stanton Jones
          University of Oregon   An Opportunity for Critical Discourse in Design Education              209
                           USA



                                 tical analysis of exclusion and inclusion. The authors developed
                                 a joint Architecture/Landscape Architecture studio that took a
                                 critical look at how existing residential neighborhoods could
                                 accommodate greater density and meet the needs of a diverse
                                 and aging population. Students critically examined the homoge-
                                 neity implicit in neighborhoods developed over time in accor-
                                 dance with traditional zoning and explore the ramifications of
                                 designing for greater diversity. Then investigated whether per-
                                 mitted increases in density could also enhance livability, by
                                 encouraging building innovations that respond to: changing
                                 household composition and housing needs throughout people’s
                                 lives; changing uses of and demands on neighborhood open
                                 space; increasingly multigenerational and multicultural commu-
                                 nity makeup; and a more sustainable community.

                                 Students worked in multidisciplinary teams that encouraged
                                 them to consider the differing perspectives of others – from
                                 other countries, from other backgrounds, and from different
                                 disciplines. Design exploration took place at multiple scales
                                 from unit design to neighborhood placemaking to urban water-
                                 shed. While the focus was on inclusion and exclusion, universal
                                 design was an identifiable model for creating solutions that
                                 meet the needs of a wide range of people. Applying universal
                                 design to problems at the scale of neighborhood and land use
                                 was difficult for the students to comprehend at first because
                                 most of the existing exemplars illustrate universal design at the
                                 object or interior design scale. The instructors encouraged stu-
                                 dents to read and critique contemporary planning theory and
                                 social research for its relevance to this project. A few specific
                                 exercises were developed to illustrate diversity among the stu-
                                 dents.

                                 Students made individual posters of a favorite home place
                                 where they had lived at some point in their lives and were asked
                                 to identify the special qualities they associated with it (Marcus
                                 1995). They also identified the «cast of characters» that were
                                 important to the place. The students discovered from this exer-
                                 cise that there was a broad array of life/family/housing experi-
                                 ences within this studio. These home places exist within
                                 individual contexts, with a host of outside influences contribu-
                                 ting to the qualities of the place students chose to illustrate. The
                                 next step was to explore how these seemingly disparate experi-
                                 ences might be woven into a tapestry of housing and land use
                                 types that approximates how the students’ define a good neigh-
                                 borhood.
210                         UNIVERSAL design   Part 2 North America




      Students were asked, in groups of five to seven individuals, to
      develop a single-block (400’ x 400’) of a mythical neighbor-
      hood that included all of their favorite home places. They were
      free to choose to have each student’s place represented once and
      only once, or select some for repeated inclusion into a fabric of
      ‘higher density’. They were also free to choose how many total
      units to include in the block, as well as any additional elements
      that they felt would be appropriate or important to the livability
      of the neighborhood.

      An exercise to envision the diversity of possible household
      types seeking inclusion in a neighborhood, the students divided
      into pairs and drew numbers from 1–7. They were asked to illu-
      strate a household containing that number of people. The twelve
      resulting households were pinned up for discussion. The student
      pairs were then asked to identify household configurations that
      were missing from the initial group and illustrate those as well.
      The twenty-four examples represent a range of households that
      reflect a diversity of age, ability, culture, composition, as well
      as economic and social status. The instructors asked the stu-
      dents to use these typical households as representative of who
      might choose to live in their neighborhoods to test their hypo-
      theses about neighborhood improvements.

      For the design project, students were divided into teams to ana-
      lyze a real neighborhood and were asked to: 1) increase density
      and 2) explore how to make the neighborhood more inclusive
      by determining what types of households don’t live there, why,
      and what interventions would make the neighborhood more
      appealing to them.

      A variety of non-designers were invited to discuss the students’
      proposals and provide feedback. In addition to offering concrete
      ideas about making neighborhoods more welcoming, they were
      especially critical of the inadequacy of architecture drawings to
      communicate with users. Some students chose to apply univer-
      sal design values to the presentation of their work, adding
      explanatory text, Braille, and other graphic devices to make
      their drawings understandable to non-designers.

      Studio is an excellent venue for students to explore how the
      design process might be enhanced to bring in opinions and
      experiences beyond their own: user participation and student
      driven research. The overall challenge of teaching universal
      design in the studio setting is to help students think creatively
Polly Welch and Stanton Jones
          University of Oregon   An Opportunity for Critical Discourse in Design Education             211
                           USA



                                 and inclusively, at the same time, so that their final designs are
                                 simultaneously aesthetically ‘beautiful’ and socially equitable.

                                 Conclusions
                                 Teaching universal design as a value embedded within each and
                                 every design decision is a daunting challenge. Yet, to help stu-
                                 dents see beyond code driven user requirements and to enable
                                 them to think creatively about how to infuse their own design
                                 work with the values of inclusivity and equity, requires a critical
                                 shift in design thinking. The themes described earlier, that have
                                 informed the authors’ teaching, are also ongoing agenda for
                                 pedagogical invention and offer the following challenges for
                                 sustained, collective inquiry by those teaching universal design.

                                 The Seven Principles of Universal Design provide a foundation
                                 for guidance on achieving universal design but need further
                                 development to be more informative at scales larger than pro-
                                 ducts, rooms, and buildings. Students working on projects with
                                 greater spatial complexity, increased physical scale, and users
                                 with a broad range of identities, found the principles difficult to
                                 apply. Nor do the principles inform complex tradeoffs in buil-
                                 ding or preserving environments that need to meet multiple
                                 goals, such as wilderness habitat preservation in the face of
                                 recreational development, or safe places for children’s play in
                                 light of the role of trial and error in cognitive development.
                                 Students and faculty in landscape architecture, planning, and
                                 architecture are in a unique position to investigate and develop
                                 the inclusive qualities of the Seven Principles at larger scales.

                                 Using «facets of identity» as a tool for teaching and discussing
                                 diversity and inclusivity in the creation of the built environment
                                 reinforces for students the importance of thinking broadly about
                                 users in the design process. Many students, especially 18–21
                                 year olds, believe they are eternally healthy and immortal. They
                                 are also at a critical stage in their own identity development that
                                 leaves them open to discuss how individual traits or ‘facets’
                                 might be supported by the actions that designers and planners
                                 take. By affording students the opportunity to see themselves as
                                 multifaceted users of the places they design, educators create an
                                 opportunity to broaden the discussion to encompass facets stu-
                                 dents do not yet possess. This allows the value of inclusivity to
                                 permeate the discussion in a way that personalizes the issue,
                                 and makes it one that students can grasp, internalize, and use.
                                 Available research on users generally is oriented to the single
212                        UNIVERSAL design   Part 2 North America




      facet of identity, posing a challenge to instructors to integrate
      across user categories. A more promising approach than relying
      on personal experience and research, however, is to bring the
      user/consultant more prominently into the teaching process.

      Incorporating users into design teaching would, in the United
      States, be a radical departure from prevailing design pedagogy,
      challenging the very notion of expertise that design professio-
      nals collectively value and promote. Public participation, as a
      planning and design activity, has been effectively co-opted by
      developers and bureaucrats, seeking to justify their worldview
      (Hester 1996, Jones 1998). A return to substantive input from
      multiple constituencies is a first step to creating more inclusive
      environments. Design students must be exposed to the value,
      processes, and politics of user participation during their design
      training to be able to exercise a more democratic practice of
      making inclusive places.
Polly Welch and Stanton Jones
          University of Oregon   An Opportunity for Critical Discourse in Design Education          213
                           USA



                                 References
                                 Adaptive Environments. Universal Design Education Project
                                    2.0. Unpublished report. 1996.
                                 Adaptive Environments. Access to the Design Professions:
                                    Report to the Task Force. Unpublished report. 1999.
                                 Blandy, D., Tepfer F., Zimmer L., Jones S., and Welch P.: Power
                                    and Place. In EDRA 28/1997 Proceedings of the
                                    Environmental Design Research Association, Montreal,
                                    Quebec. 1997.
                                 Dutton, T.: Voices in Architectural Education: Cultural Politics
                                    and Pedagogy. Thomas Dutton, Ed. New York: Bergin and
                                    Garvey. 1991.
                                 Grant, B.: Accommodation and Resistance: The Built
                                    Environment and the African American Experience. In
                                    Dutton, Thomas and Lian Hurst Mann. Reconstructing
                                    Architecture: Critical Discourses and Social Practices.
                                    Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. 1996.
                                 Hester, R.: Wanted: Local Participation with a View in. In
                                    EDRA 27/1996 Proceedings of the Environmental Design
                                    Research Association, Salt Lake City, UT. 1996.
                                 Hunter, D.: Creeps! Disability in Landscape Architecture.
                                    Master’s Thesis in Landscape Architecture, University of
                                    Oregon. 2000.
                                 Jones, S.: Beyond Belligerent Compliance, in Landscape
                                    Architecture Magazine. 1998.
                                 Jones, S.: Decolonizing Landscape Architecture:
                                    Multiculturalism and the Landscape of Future Possibilities
                                    in Wagner, C. (ed.) Design For Change: 1996 Annual
                                    Meeting Proceedings of the American Society of Landscape
                                    Architects. pp. 162–68. 1996.
                                 Lifchez, R.: Rethinking Architecture: Design Students and
                                    Physically Disabled People. Berkeley, CA: University of
                                    California Press. 1987.
                                 Lusher, R. and Mace, R. L.: Design for Physical and Mental
                                    Disabilities. In the Encyclopedia of Architecture. New York:
                                    John Wiley and Sons. 1989.
                                 Mace, R. L.: A Perspective on Universal Design. 1998.
                                    http://www.adaptenv.org/examples/ronmaceplenary98.asp
                                 Marcus, C. Cooper.: House as a mirror of self: exploring the
                                    deeper meaning of home. Berkeley, CA: Conari Press. 1995.
                                 Ostroff, E.: Mining Our Natural Resources: The User as
                                    Expert. Innovation, the Quarterly Journal of the Industrial
                                    Designers Society of America, Volume 16, No. 1. 1997.
                                    http://www.adaptenv.org/examples/article1.asp?
214                           UNIVERSAL design   Part 2 North America




      Weisman, L.: Discrimination by Design. Chicago: University of
        Illinois Press. 1992.
      Weisman, L.: Re-designing Architectural Education. In
        Rothschild, Joan. (ed) Design and Feminism. New
        Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press. 1999.
      Welch, P. (Ed.): Strategies for Teaching Universal Design.
        Boston, MA: Adaptive Environments and Berkeley, CA:
        MIG Communications. 1995; 2000. Also available at:
        http://www.adaptenv.org/universal/strategies.asp
      Welch, P. and Jones, S.: Teaching Universal Design Through
        Inclusiveness. In Designing for the Twenty First Century:
        Proceedings of an International Conference on Universal
        Design. 1998.
      Welch, P. and Jones, S.: Evolving Visions: Segregation,
        Integration, and Inclusion in the Design of Built Places. In
        EDRA 30/1999-The Power of Imagination: Proceedings of
        the Environmental Design Research Association. 1999.
      Welch, P.: TAKING SPACE: Locating disability in design educa-
        tion and practice. In Confronting Conservative Architecture.
        ACSA Eastern Regional Conference, Boston, MA. 2000.
      Welch, P. and Jones, S.: Advances in Universal Design
        Education in the United States. In Preiser, Wolfgang and
        Elaine Ostroff (eds.) The Universal Design Handbook. New
        York: McGraw-Hill. 2001a.
      Welch, P. and Jones, S.: Designing to Transgress: A Model for
        Teaching Universal Design Values. Forthcoming article.
        2001.


      End Notes
      I    Portions of this chapter have been previously published in The
           Universal Design Handbook and in Confronting the Conservative
           in Architecture: Proceedings of the 2000 Northeast Regional
           Meeting of the Association of Collegiate Schools of Architecture.
      II   Images have been collected through two competitions. The first
           universal design images were made available by Universal
           Designers & Consultants, Inc. in 1996 as a slide collection called
           Images of Excellence in Universal Design, jointly sponsored by the
           National Endowment for the Arts and the National Building
           Museum. (See http://www.UniversalDesign.com/services). The
           most recent collection of universal design images, Universal Design
           Exemplars, is available as a CD-ROM from the Center for
           Universal Design and was funded by the National Endowment for
           the Arts, NEC Foundation of America and the Trace R&D Center at
           the University of Wisconsin-Madison. (See
           http://www.design.ncsu.edu/cud).
Polly Welch and Stanton Jones
          University of Oregon    An Opportunity for Critical Discourse in Design Education                   215
                           USA



                                 III   These principles refer to the Seven Principles of Universal Design.
                                       See Main Appendix 1 of this document or
                                       http://www.design.ncsu.edu/cud/univ_design/princ_overview.htm
                                 IV    These schools include Iowa State, Miami University, Michigan
                                       State University, Purdue University, State University of New York
                                       at Buffalo, Missouri State, Tennessee State University, Texas Tech
                                       University, and Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University.
                                 V     Presenters included Susan Goltsman, landscape architect and prin-
                                       cipal of Moore Iacofano Goltsman of Berkeley, CA; Joe Meade,
                                       Recreational Wilderness Manager and Access Specialist, United
                                       States Forest Service, Washington, DC; Ricardo Gomes, Professor
                                       of Industrial Design, San Francisco State University; and Kristy
                                       Edmunds, artist and director, Portland (OR) Institute of
                                       Contemporary Art.
216   UNIVERSAL design   Part 2 North America




                                                Photo: FotoKnutsen AS
      Wolfgang Preiser
University of Cincinnati   Infusing Universal Design Into the Curriculum                       217
                   USA




                           2.3 Infusing Universal
                           Design Into the
                           Curriculum
                           Wolfgang F.E. Preiser, Ph.D., University of Cincinnati, USA


                           This chapter reports on the organizational structure, pedagogy
                           and teaching methodology, as well as the content of a universal
                           design course and curriculum elements at the University of
                           Cincinnati’s College of Design, Architecture, Art and Planning.
                           It describes course structure and teaching methods, and it
                           details the course content, emphasizing in particular the practi-
                           cal work, including post-occupancy evaluation (POE), and ana-
                           lytic, evaluative methods in general. The cooperative education
                           system, unique for the University of Cincinnati, as far as the
                           United States is concerned, as well as the field-based, “service
                           learning” approach to instruction are outlined and thoughts
                           about future directions in this endeavor are presented.

                           Organizational Structure
                           The University of Cincinnati
                           At the University of Cincinnati, the School of Architecture and
                           Interior Design is housed in the College of Design,
                           Architecture, Art & Planning. As the name of the College
                           implies, there are three other schools besides Architecture and
                           Interior Design, namely, the School of Design, the School of
                           Art, and the School of Planning. Current enrollment at the col-
                           lege is approximately 1,200 students. The College has been in
                           existence for over 75 years, and presently occupies a facility
                           that consists of an older part dating from the 50’s and 70’s, and
                           a recent addition designed by Peter Eisenman (East Facade, see
                           Figure 1), which was completed in 1996, with a total square
                           footage amounting to 310,000 square feet.

                           The School of Architecture and Interior Design has an enrollment
                           of 450 students in architecture and 200 students in interior
                           design. The existing MS Arch. Program has about 20 students
                           enrolled. There are 25 full-time and 5 part-time faculty members.
218                           UNIVERSAL design    Part 2 North America




      Fig. 1. East Facade of the College.
      Photo: Bulletin of the University of Cincinnati in 1997.



      The cooperative education system, which is unique for the
      University of Cincinnati, provides all students the opportunity
      to work in professional practices for a total of seven quarters, or
      almost two years, prior to being able to graduate. The
      Professional Practice Division of the University assists students
      in job applications and placement. This means that at all times,
      50% of the student body are present on campus while taking
      course work, while the other 50% is away. A network of over
      400 firms has been established, with additional internship
      opportunities being available in a number of firms in London,
      United Kingdom, and Germany.

      Curricular Structure
      At the present time, the curriculum is undergoing major change
      by being transformed from a six-year Bachelor degree as the
      terminal, first professional degree, to a Master of Architecture
      in the 4+2 format, meaning four years of undergraduate study
      leading to a Bachelor of Science in Architecture degree
      (Bs.Arch.), plus two years of graduate study culminating in the
      Master’s degree.

      While there is no sequence of courses focusing solely on uni-
      versal design in this curriculum, elements of universal design
      Wolfgang Preiser
University of Cincinnati   Infusing Universal Design Into the Curriculum                         219
                   USA



                           are infused at different levels, culminating in a singular elective
                           course at the fifth year level. This starts in the freshman year in
                           an introductory course called “Introduction to the Theory of
                           Environmental Design II”. It continues in mid-level courses,
                           such as, “Introduction to Programming”. The latter two courses
                           are required, and have to be taken by all architecture and inte-
                           rior design students. Further immersion into universal design
                           subject matter is possible through several elective courses,
                           which the author offers upper level students, such as, “Building
                           Evaluation” and “Universal Design: Case Studies in
                           Architecture”. Both of these courses are field-based and service
                           learning oriented, and they get the students involved in studying
                           real people in real world projects in the local community, as
                           opposed to abstract book learning.

                           Further opportunities exist for students to enroll in independent
                           study credit for purposes of pursuing individual or team investi-
                           gations or projects emphasizing universal design issues. Such is
                           the case with a team of two students who are currently participa-
                           ting in a universal design competition at the national level, focu-
                           sing on a universally designed elementary school. Finally,
                           students who are so inclined may choose their thesis subject to
                           be universal design oriented. Thesis implies a theoretical written
                           investigation in addition to a comprehensive final design project
                           prior to graduation. In such cases, the author may be asked to
                           serve on thesis committees and to advise on directions and
                           resources for the thesis. Accordingly, networking at the national
                           and international levels is a common method in order to provide
                           the student with the absolutely highest quality information, pre-
                           cedents or access to literature, documentations and advice.

                           Incentives
                           Recent surveys of major employers in architecture and interior
                           design in the United States ranked our interior design program
                           graduates first and our architecture graduates third in the nation
                           (Cramer, 2000). Our graduates are most valued by employers
                           for their capacity of critical thinking, a product of both signifi-
                           cant professional experience and theoretical/academic instruc-
                           tion, starting with the first year and ending at the time of
                           graduation. Thus, questioning basic assumptions behind pro-
                           gramming and design decisions is a position commonly held by
                           our students.

                           Part of this questioning has to do with who one considers the
                           client to be, and further, what the client’s needs are, depending
220                          UNIVERSAL design    Part 2 North America




      on such factors as age, gender, cultural and ethnic origin, and so
      forth. Universal design and its seven Principles facilitate such
      questioning, and it can easily be incorporated into research
      and/or value-based programming, which, in turn, becomes a
      solid foundation for good design. In all of the courses the
      author is offering, students are encouraged to produce work
      which is of very high quality and which can become part of the
      student’s portfolio.

      Teaching Methods
      Relationship to Planning/Architecture/Design
      Theory
      The approach taken to instruction on universal design topics is
      heavily biased toward environment/behavior studies, a field
      which has grown up over the past 30 years (Preiser, 1999). The
      foundation and theoretical perspective regarding person-envi-
      ronment relationships was described as a “habitability frame-
      work” (Preiser, 1983). Over time, this framework evolved into a
      conceptualization which is not static, but rather a dynamic,
      forward-moving and evolving system with feedback and feed-
      forward loops, and a “driver”or engine which moves the sys-
      tem. These could be planners, programmers, designers, of
      products, environments and systems, but they could also
      involve the end-users. This was described in the book Design
      Intervention: Toward a More Humane Architecture (Preiser,
      Vischer and White, 1991).

      Most recently, in a state-of-the-art review of evaluation practi-
      ces, as far as the built environment and products are concerned,
      this conceptualization was extended to be applied to universal
      design. Universal design evaluation (UDE) bases its perfor-
      mance criteria on the seven Universal Design Principles listed
      in the introduction to this book, and develops the notion of uni-
      versal design performance evaluation (see Figure 2), (Preiser,
      2001a) even further than reported in the Universal Design
      Handbook (Preiser, 2001b). 8




      8 Editor’s note: Evaluation methods are also described in detail in chap-
        ters 1.4, and 2.5.
      Wolfgang Preiser
University of Cincinnati    Infusing Universal Design Into the Curriculum                          221
                   USA




                           Fig. 2. Universal Design Evaluation (UDE) Process Model.

                           User Involvement
                           It is the author’s basic teaching philosophy to involve end users,
                           as well as consultants, guest lecturers and other feedback sources
                           in his courses and projects. In the past this has included organiza-
                           tions serving persons with disabilities, such as the blind, and, in a
                           particular instance, the involvement by both undergraduate and
                           graduate students continued over a number of years by visiting
                           and carrying out field-based research at the New Mexico School
                           for the Blind. Projects such as these teach research and data
                           gathering skills, and by definition they have to be carried out
                           with the members of the population that is to be studied.

                           Furthermore, students involved in these projects learned how to
                           write research proposals for purposes of grant funding, and fur-
                           ther, how to write up and publish the results of these studies. In
                           some cases, Master’s Theses were prepared by using this appro-
                           ach to studying phenomena with intense end-user involvement.
                           Some of this work received national recognition through several
                           awards, thereby exposing the work of students not just at the
                           local university level, but in the entire country.
222                         UNIVERSAL design   Part 2 North America




      Part of this teaching methodology involves field trips to such
      environments as public places, transportation facilities, shop-
      ping malls, Alzheimer care centers, retirement homes, as well
      as an individual home which was universally designed by the
      author. These field trips permit direct observation, recording of
      behavior and interaction with the occupants of the above-men-
      tioned environments. Through the concept of “service learning”
      mentioned above, students get involved in the community and
      are asked to synthesize their experiences and lessons learned in
      the form of reports and presentations to the “clients,” pertaining
      to both positive and negative performance of design features.

      Experience-Based Learning
      Evaluating facilities in terms of compliance with the Americans
      With Disabilities Act (ADA) is a standard requirement for cour-
      ses taught by the author. On occasion this involves students using
      wheelchairs and checking out buildings and their surroundings
      for accessibility. Other methods used include direct observation,
      still and video photography, as well as physical measurements of
      space, dimensions and ambient environment performance, such
      as lighting, acoustics, odor, airflow, temperature, etc. In a project
      called “Vital Signs,” which was sponsored by the University of
      California at Berkeley and the Pacific Power & Electric
      Company, students first interviewed, surveyed and observed the
      users of the college complex (see Figure 1 above), followed by
      physical measurements of lighting levels and sound levels at so-
      called “trouble spots” that were identified through the user feed-
      back in interviews and surveys. That way, a very demonstrable
      correlation between subjective responses and objective physical
      measurements could be established (Vital Signs, 1999).

      Analysis of Barriers in the Environment
      As indicated above, the analysis of barriers in the environment is a
      standard component of courses offered by the author (see
      Curricular Structure, above). In fact, on occasion, this is the only
      focus of field-based class assignments. Furthermore, it is an
      important component of the three-day POE workshop modules on
      building evaluation which the author has conducted world wide,
      not just with University students, but with architects, planners and
      facility managers, on both public and private sector buildings.

      Sequencing courses in evaluation programming and design has
      been an experiment the author has attempted on several occasi-
      ons in the past. The purpose of this approach is to immerse the
      student deeply into the subject matter, characteristics and capa-
      Wolfgang Preiser
University of Cincinnati   Infusing Universal Design Into the Curriculum                            223
                   USA



                           bilities of the end users they are designing for. Therefore, carry-
                           ing out facility visits to state-of-the-art facilities of the building
                           type in question is a quick method for rapid learning about the
                           building that the student probably knows very little about, such
                           as Alzheimer care centers, complemented by literature research
                           and a more formal evaluation effort. The resulting findings and
                           recommendations can be directly applied to a programming and
                           design project (Preiser, 1982).

                           This approach permits students to gather data for the evaluation
                           and to compile the program in a collective manner; i.e., by
                           teams of students, while the design will be carried out on an
                           individual basis.

                           Contact With Industry/Building Trade
                           Over the years, the author has built and maintained an extensive
                           network of colleagues in professional organizations and indu-
                           stry. Contacts have ranged from serving on the American
                           Institute of Architects’ Research Advisory Panel in the 1970s, to
                           chairing committees on programming and post-occupancy
                           evaluation at the National Academy of Sciences’ Building
                           Research Board in the 1980s. Numerous conference presen-
                           tations to such organizations as NEOCON and EURO-
                           FM/IFMA typically addressed issues and methods in building
                           performance evaluation, as reflected in their respective con-
                           ference proceedings and other publications.

                           Direct involvement by the author with industry in the form of
                           consulting for client organizations is exemplified by the POE
                           Training Workshops for Kaiser Permanente (Preiser, 1996), an
                           excerpt of which can be found in the section dealing with
                           Practical Work below. In all the other listed three-day work-
                           shops, a similar approach was used with the participants being a
                           mix of client representatives (staff, planners, architects, facili-
                           ties managers), as well as students and faculty representing
                           local universities’ schools of architecture.

                           Course Content
                           Social, Political and Demographic Context and
                           Issues
                           The above topics are covered in an elective upper-level course
                           entitled, “Universal Design: Case Studies in Architecture”. For
                           information on course context, see the syllabus in Appendix 2
                           below.
224                        UNIVERSAL design   Part 2 North America




      The course uses as a text the Universal Design Handbook, (Preiser
      and Ostroff, 2001), which addresses these and other items in a
      comprehensive manner and from a global perspective. The struc-
      ture of the Handbook with its 10 sections makes a perfect fit for
      the 10-week quarters our University system provides for:

      – Part I, Introduction
      – Part II, Premises and Perspectives in Universal Design
      – Part III, Accessibility Standards and Universal Design
        Guidelines.
      – Part IV, Public Policy Systems and Issues
      – Part V, Residential Environments
      – Part VI, Universal Design Practices
      – Part VII, Education and Research
      – Part VIII, Case Studies
      – Part IX, Information Technology
      – Part X, The Future of Universal Design

      Different, even contradicting, value positions are presented
      when contrasting universal design in the industrialized world
      with that in the industrializing countries. For An outline of the
      Universal Design Handbook, see the Appendix of this book.
      This text and course also addresses demographic and aging
      trends, as well as political and social issues that are connected
      with the emerging movement of universal design.

      Theory of Universal Design
      While there is no one, coherent theory of universal design, there
      are a number of elements which the course and its text address.
      For example, issues of individual accessibility needs and affor-
      dances of the designed and built environment are dealt with by
      Powell Lawton (Lawton, 2001), as well as the notion of healing
      by design and the impact of the environment on brain develop-
      ment are discussed by John Zeisel (Zeisel, 2001).

      While the aforementioned “habitability framework” constitutes
      yet another element of theoretically linking persons to the envi-
      ronment, person-environment relationships and their effect on
      the well-being of the occupants of environments or the users of
      products are at the core of this course in which students read
      and research topics of their own choice within the framework of
      the course text categories.

      The global network of 69 authors or author groups who have
      written the chapters of the course text, constitute an invaluable
      Wolfgang Preiser
University of Cincinnati   Infusing Universal Design Into the Curriculum                        225
                   USA



                           resource which students can tap into, not only as far as indivi-
                           dual chapters and their content are concerned, but also in terms
                           of the resource sections contained in most chapters which list
                           Web sites and addresses of important organizations, publica-
                           tions and other items. With today’s information technology and
                           Internet access to resources, this provides students with the
                           most relevant and up-to-date information possible, literally at
                           their fingertips.

                           Practical Work
                           Field exercises and service learning, as explained above, are
                           integral components of this course which permit students to get
                           involved in the community. As the name of the course indicates,
                           “Universal Design: Case Studies in Architecture”, the course
                           helps students to immerse themselves in particular segments of
                           the population and their respective needs, as far as the designed
                           and built environment is concerned. Using the model of case
                           study based learning, students carry out evaluative research
                           using the universal design evaluation framework referred to
                           above and, by analyzing and comparing the case studies, are
                           able to distill the lessons learned, both in terms of positive and
                           negative aspects.

                           Examples of specific case studies conducted within the past
                           year are: Alzheimer Care Centers; Family Health Centers; and,
                           laboratory buildings at the University of Cincinnati, the
                           Cardiovascular Research Center and the Molecular Science
                           Research Center (designed by Frank O. Gehry).

                           In all cases, the objective is, among others, to have the project
                           report become part of the student’s portfolio.

                           An Example of Practical Work:
                           A POE Training Workshop and Facility
                           Visit
                           Synopsis of Workshop
                           A 3-day POE training workshop was held at the Kaiser
                           Permanente Northwestern Regional Office in Portland, Oregon.
                           The purpose was to train Kaiser Permanente staff in facility
                           visit and POE methodology and more important, to evaluate a
                           prototype medical office building in Longview/Kelso,
                           Washington, which had recently been completed and occupied
                           (see Figure 3). The structure of the 3-day training workshop was
                           as follows:
226                          UNIVERSAL design   Part 2 North America




      Fig. 3. Kaiser Permanente Medical Office Building.

      Day 1: POE Training for Facility Visits. Approximately 20
      Kaiser Permanente facilities-related staff members participated
      in lecture presentations on the history, evolution, and methodo-
      logy of post-occupancy evaluation and facility visits in particu-
      lar. The presentations included slide lectures and videotapes of
      previous POE case studies. At the end of day 1, three subteams
      were formed that would address different areas of the building
      to be evaluated. Base documentation on the building, such as
      floor plans, organizational charts, mission statements, etc. were
      reviewed. This included questionnaire surveys that had been
      sent to the administrator and supervisory staff of the medical
      office building prior to the workshop.

      Day 2: Data Gathering. On this day, on-site data gathering
      was carried out in the medical office building. Methods in-
      cluded interviews with administrators and supervisory staff, as
      well as walkthroughs and still photography of all major buil-
      ding areas. Subteams covered the assigned building areas and
      personnel, and they gathered intermittently for review meetings
      and reports to the workshop coordinator. At the end of day 2,
      subteams were assigned summary draft reports to be presented
      on day 3. Photographic slides were processed overnight.

      Day 3: Reporting. Subteams reviewed their findings and
      drafted preliminary written and verbal reports to be presented
      in a final wrap-up session with senior management. All the
      recommendations in both the written and oral presentations
      were organized into major sections by area or department.
      Wolfgang Preiser
University of Cincinnati   Infusing Universal Design Into the Curriculum                         227
                   USA



                           Furthermore, recommendations were made in three categories
                           of issues:
                           • Category 1: Issues that could be addressed immediately.
                           • Category 2: Issues to be incorporated in future buildings.
                           • Category 3: Issues that require policy changes.

                           In addition, issues were grouped according to the views of staff
                           and patients (called members at Kaiser Permanente).

                           Facility Visit
                           A facility visit, like an indicative post-occupancy evaluation
                           (POE) (Preiser, et al., 1988) does what the name implies. It pro-
                           vides an indication of major successes and failures in a buil-
                           ding’s performance. This type of visit is usually carried out
                           within a very short time span, from two to three hours to one or
                           two days. It presumes that the evaluator/evaluation team is
                           experienced in conducting facility visits and is familiar with the
                           building type to be evaluated, as well as the issues that tend to
                           be associated with it. The following is an overview of data-
                           gathering methods that are typical of a facility visit.

                           Typical Issues Identified in Facility Visits. According to the
                           author’s experience with facility visits, the most common issues
                           in building performance range from technical performance
                           (e.g., poor airflow) to psychological concerns (e.g., lack of pati-
                           ent privacy); leakage, poor signage, lack of storage, lack of pri-
                           vacy, hallway blockage, poor air circulation, poor temperature
                           control, handicapped accessibility, security problems, health
                           and safety problems, aesthetic problems, entry door problems
                           with wind and accumulation of dirt, inadequacy of space for
                           equipment (e.g., copiers), maintainability of glass surfaces
                           (e.g., skywalks or inaccessible skylights), and so on.

                           While this list of issues appears to identify only negative perfor-
                           mance aspects in facilities, positive aspects of building perfor-
                           mance are usually identified also. Both positive and negative
                           performance aspects were found and prioritized by the facility
                           visit team, which consisted of architects, planners and facilities
                           personnel of the Kaiser Permanente Northwest Region head-
                           quartered in Portland, Oregon. The author then carried out a
                           very similar project for the Southern California Region head-
                           quarters of Kaiser Permanente in Pasadena, California, where a
                           facility visit was conducted at the Mission Viejo Medical Office
                           Building.
228                          UNIVERSAL design   Part 2 North America




      In the past, the author found that approximately 80 percent of all
      important issues and information can be identified during a 1-day
      or half-day visit, depending on the size and complexity of the
      building, to a facility in a very efficient and cost-effective manner.

      Preparatory Work. It is useful to prepare the respondents at a
      health care facility for the impending facility visit by sending
      both the structured interview schedule and the quality profile
      survey to the administrator of the facility. This helps the admi-
      nistrator focus on the types of issues in which the facility visi-
      ting team is interested. It is helpful if a limited number of
      supervisory staff responds to the quality profile survey, which
      is returned to the facility visit team prior to the visit (see
      Appendix C for generic interview and survey instruments).
      Thus, the team will get a good sense of where the problems and
      priorities lie or where the excellent features are to be found in
      the facility, even before the site visit occurs.

      Archival and Document Evaluation. If possible, as-built dra-
      wings of the facility to be evaluated are obtained and analyzed
      before the visit. In addition, space utilization schedules, safety
      and security records, accident reports, remodeling and repair
      records, and any other historical/archival data that may be perti-
      nent are obtained and analyzed. These activities do not necessa-
      rily occur on the building site.

      Performance Issues. A list of generic building evaluation ques-
      tions (see Appendix C) is submitted by the evaluators to the cli-
      ent organization prior to the site visit. It is common that the
      facilities manager or committee delegated to deal with ques-
      tions of space planning and building performance reply to
      open-ended questions concerning the performance elements.
      These questions deal with technical building performance, as
      far as environmental conditions are concerned. In addition, they
      deal with functional appropriateness (adequacy of space and
      health, safety and security issues, for example) and behavioral
      or psychological concerns such as the “image” of the facility.
      Replies to such questions represent management’s knowledge
      not only of problems, but also of successful features of a given
      facility.

      Walkthrough Evaluation. Following a discussion with man-
      agement about the responses to these performance issues, a
      walkthrough evaluation is conducted, covering the entire facility
      and addressing the issues raised earlier. In addition, the evalua-
      Wolfgang Preiser
University of Cincinnati   Infusing Universal Design Into the Curriculum                          229
                   USA



                           tors use direct observation and, if warranted, still photography
                           or video to identify and record building attributes that may
                           deserve particular attention. Within a few hours, a walkthrough
                           can comprehensively cover a given building.

                           Interviews. Individual or group interviews with selected per-
                           sonnel responsible for and familiar with the facility and a de-
                           briefing of the client representatives conclude the on-site visit
                           with the client organization. Subsequently, a brief summary of
                           successful and unsuccessful features of the evaluated facility is
                           submitted to the client organization for final verification and
                           review.

                           Outline of Facility Visit Phases and Steps
                           This outline of facility visit phases and steps is intended to be
                           generic, to provide the reader with a basic understanding of
                           each step’s purpose and results. The phase and steps do not
                           necessarily apply to all facility visits, nor are all items listed,
                           needed, or available in every facility visit.

                           Phase 1: Planning the Facility Visit Overview. There are seve-
                           ral preliminaries to observe in initiating and organizing a faci-
                           lity visit prior to on-site data collection. Liaison with the client
                           organization is a critical aspect of all visits. The client must be
                           briefed on the nature of the visit, the types of activities invol-
                           ved, the resources needed, and client responsibilities in carrying
                           out the visit. After agreement is reached on how extensive a
                           visit will be conducted, historical and other background infor-
                           mation that may assist in planning the evaluation is identified
                           and obtained. Coordination with user groups within the buil-
                           ding is begun, and potential benefits for participants are out-
                           lined.

                           At this point, on-line searches and reviews of the state-of-the-
                           art literature, including preparation of an annotated biblio-
                           graphy, are carried out (in this case, focusing on health care
                           facilities).

                           Resources for conducting the evaluation are organized, and a
                           preliminary schedule, work plan and budget are established in
                           which project team members’ tasks and responsibilities are
                           defined. At the same time, appropriate research methods and
                           analytical techniques are determined, and sources for evaluation
                           criteria are identified. The three steps included in this first
                           phase are reconnaissance and feasibility, resource planning, and
230                        UNIVERSAL design   Part 2 North America




      research planning.
      Phase 2: Conducting the Facility Visit Overview. In this phase
      of the facility visit, findings are reported, conclusions drawn,
      recommendations made, and eventually, the resulting actions
      reviewed. The findings of the facility visits are organized, and
      an effective reporting framework is devised. Usually, recom-
      mendations imply that the results from the facility visit must be
      prioritized, a task requiring continued liaison with the client.
      Finally, actions resulting from the facility visit are reviewed to
      ascertain that benefits envisioned in initiating the evaluation
      have, in fact, been achieved.

      The steps involved in this phase are reporting findings, recom-
      mending actions, and reviewing outcomes.

      Conclusions
      The shortcut POE methodology outlined here has proven to be
      quite effective in troubleshooting and/or prototype testing of
      building designs. This success is partly due to the following
      conditions:
      – The POE/facility walkthrough is carried out in-house; i.e., by
        staff members of the client organization.
      – The POE results are fed directly into future medical office
        building designs and thus have strategic importance for the
        organization.
      – Top-level management initiated and supported the POE.
        They subsequently received and helped implement the fin-
        dings and recommendations.
      – Information control is absolutely essential for this type of
        POE to be effective. Too often, negative findings lead to
        finger-pointing and ill feelings about those who committed
        mistakes. As long as information is released to the public
        only after clearance by the client organization, this problem
        should be resolved.
      – Training of in-house staff is one of the most effective ways to
        promote continuous use of POE without having to resort to
        expensive external consultants.

      Experience has shown that the approximate cost of carrying out
      walkthrough-type indicative POEs or facility visits is USD 0.50
      per square foot of evaluated space. This benchmark value held
      true in this project also, and it shows that significant findings
      and recommendations can result from a rather inexpensive and
      expeditious POE effort.
      Wolfgang Preiser
University of Cincinnati   Infusing Universal Design Into the Curriculum                          231
                   USA



                           Course Improvements and Future
                           Developments
                           In the context of the new Masters of Architecture Program at
                           the University of Cincinnati, scheduled to commence in the
                           Summer of 2001, it is expected that the aforementioned course
                           on universal design will become a required course for all gradu-
                           ate students; and thus, it has the potential of impacting the atti-
                           tudes and design philosophies of our graduates in significant
                           ways. First, their approach to programming and designing envi-
                           ronments will be changed toward the inclusion of universal
                           design philosophy and concepts. This could be reinforced
                           through the aforementioned sequence of universal design evalu-
                           ation programming and design studio work.

                           Secondly, as graduate students in the cooperative education
                           system carry out internships in firms around the country, their
                           thinking may affect that of their employers over the long haul.
                           Furthermore, students from the School of Design may enroll in
                           this course if it is cross-listed, and thereby influence the work of
                           graphic designers, industrial designers, digital designers, and
                           others in the College.

                           Finally, as administrators, such as school directors and the posi-
                           tion of Dean of the College open up, the new universal design
                           paradigm, as a philosophical and conceptual foundation for
                           design disciplines, may become one of the criteria for candidate
                           selection. Through continuous feedback and feedforward,
                           between students and faculty, as well as the “clients” for case
                           study field research, the course will be refined and its quality
                           improved over time.

                           References
                           Balaram, S., Universal Design in the Majority World. In:
                              Preiser, W.F.E. and Ostroff, E. (Eds), Universal Design
                              Handbook. New York. McGraw-Hill, 2001.
                           Cramer, James P. (Ed.), Almanac of Architecture and Design
                              2000. Norcross, GA: Greenway Group, 2000.
                           Lawton, P., Designing by Degree: Assessing and Incorporating
                              Individual Accessibility Needs. In: Preiser, W.F.E. and
                              Ostroff, E. (Eds), Universal Design Handbook. New York.
                              McGraw-Hill, 2001.
                           Preiser, W.F.E., Toward Universal Design Evaluation. In:
                              Preiser, W.F.E. and Ostroff, E. (Eds), Universal Design
                              Handbook. New York. McGraw-Hill, 2001.
232                       UNIVERSAL design   Part 2 North America




      Preiser, W.F.E., The Evolution of Post-Occupancy Evaluation –
         Toward Building Performance and Universal Design
         Evaluation. Washington, DC: National Academy of
         Sciences, 2001 (forthcoming).
      Preiser, W.F.E., Environment-Behavior Studies – A (Personal)
         Retrospective. In: Mann, T. (Ed.), The Power of
         Imagination: Proceedings of the 30th Conference of the
         Environmental Design Research Association. Edmond, OK
         EDRA, Inc., 1999.
      Preiser, W.F.E., POE Training Workshop and Prototype Testing
         at the Kaiser Permanente Medical Office Building in
         Mission Viejo, California, USA. In: Baird, G., et al. (Eds).
         Building Evaluation Techniques. London: McGraw-Hill,
         1996.
      Preiser, W.F.E., Design Innovation and the Challenge of
         Change. In: Preiser, W.F.E., Vischer, J.C., and White, E.T.
         (Eds). Design Intervention: Toward a More Humane
         Architecture. New York. Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1991.
      Preiser, W.F.E., Vischer, J.C., and White, E.T. (Eds), Design
         Intervention: Toward a More Humane Architecture. New
         York. Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1991.
      Preiser, W.F.E., Environmental Design Cybernetics: A
         Relativistic Framework for the Design of Space Stations and
         Settlements. In: Harrison, A., Clearwater, C. and McKay,
         C.P. (Eds), The Human Experience in Antarctica:
         Application to Life in Space. New York. Springer, 1990.
      Preiser, W.F.E., Habitability – A Conceptual Approach Towards
         Linking Human Behavior and Physical Environment. In
         Borden, R. (Ed.), Human Ecology: A Gathering of
         Perspectives. Washington, DC. Society for Human
         Ecology, 1986.
      Preiser, W.F.E., The Habitability Framework: A Conceptual
         Approach Towards Linking Human Behavior and Physical
         Environment. Guildford, Surrey, U.K. Design Studies, Vol. 4,
         No. 2, April 1983, pp. 84–91.
      Preiser, W.F.E., Behavioral Science and the Design Studio –
         Results of an Experiment in Sequencing Post-Occupancy
         Evaluation, Programming and Design in a Graduate Level
         Studio. L’Hotel d’Architecture – Proceedings of the 70th
         Annual Meeting of the Association of Collegiate Schools of
         Architecture, Quebec, Canada. Washington, DC: ACSA,
         1982.
      Preiser, W.F.E and Ostroff, E. (Eds), Universal Design
         Handbook. New York. McGraw-Hill, 2001.
      Wolfgang Preiser
University of Cincinnati   Infusing Universal Design Into the Curriculum                        233
                   USA



                           Story, M.F., Principles of Universal Design. In: Preiser, W.F.E.
                               and Ostroff, E. (Eds), Universal Design Handbook. New
                               York. McGraw-Hill, 2001.
                           Vital Signs Web Address, 1999:
                           http://www.classware.uc.edu/instructors/smithdl/vitsig/v-
                               /vital.htm
                           Zeisel, J., Healing by Design. In: Preiser, W.F.E. and Ostroff, E.
                               (Eds), Universal Design Handbook. New York. McGraw-
                               Hill, 2001.


                           Appendix 1
                           Generic Evaluation Instruments:
                           Structured Interview and Building
                           Occupant Survey
                           UNIVERSAL DESIGN EVALUATION (UDE)
                           Building Evaluation Interview Questions – Indicative Level
                           We would like to know how well your facility performs for all
                           those who occupy it. Successes and failures (if any) are consi-
                           dered insofar as they affect occupant health, safety, efficient
                           functioning, and psychological well-being. Your answers will
                           help improve the design of future, similar buildings.

                           Below please identify successes in the building by responding
                           to the following broad information categories and by referring
                           to documented evidence or specific building areas whenever
                           possible. First, please comment on the issues which have been
                           most serious in recent times and then comment on the adequacy
                           of the following:

                             1) Overall Design Concept
                             2) Site Design: Contextuality, Access for Deliveries/Waste
                                Disposal
                             3) Health/Safety Performance
                             4) Security Performance
                             5) Exterior Appearance
                             6) Interior Appearance
                             7) Activity Spaces Performance
                             8) Spatial Relationships, Work Flow, etc.
                             9) Circulation Areas; e.g., lobby, hallways, stairs, elevators,
                                escalators, etc.
                           10) Heating/Cooling and Ventilation Performance
                           11) Lighting Performance; e.g., day vs. artificial lighting
234                         UNIVERSAL design   Part 2 North America




      12)    Acoustic Performance
      13)   Plumbing Performance
      14)   Electrical Performance
      15)   Surface Materials Performance; i.e., durability and main-
            tainability of floors, walls, ceilings, etc.
      16)   Under-utilized or overcrowded spaces
      17)   Conformance with the Principles of Universal Design
      18)   Compliance with ADA Accessibility Requirements
      19)   Efficiency of Space Utilization: Ratio of gross vs. net
            assignable area
      20)   Energy Conservative design/sq. ft./year
      21)   Other, please specify (e.g., needed facilities currently
            lacking)

      Occupant Survey – Investigative Level
      We wish to conduct a performance evaluation of your building.
      The purpose of this evaluation is to assess how well the buil-
      ding performs for those who occupy it in terms of health, safety,
      security, functionality, and psychological comfort. The benefits
      of an evaluation include: identification of positive and negative
      performance aspects of the building; better building utilization;
      feedback on how to improve future, similar buildings; or, remo-
      deling of your own building.

      In the survey that follows, please respond only to those questi-
      ons that are applicable to you. Indicate your answers by mar-
      king the appropriate blanks with an “X”. The key for quality
      ratings is: EX = Excellent quality; G = Good quality; F = Fair
      quality; P = Poor quality.
              Wolfgang Preiser
        University of Cincinnati   Infusing Universal Design Into the Curriculum                                    235
                           USA




1) Please rate the overall quality of this building:

                                                                   EX        G          F           P       N/A
   a)   Aesthetic quality of exterior                              [ ]      [ ]        [ ]         [ ]      [ ]
   b)   Aesthetic quality of interior                              [ ]      [ ]        [ ]         [ ]      [ ]
   c)   Amount of space                                            [ ]      [ ]        [ ]         [ ]      [ ]
   d)   Environmental quality (lighting,
        acoustics, temperature, etc.)                             [   ]     [      ]   [       ]   [    ]   [   ]
   e)   Proximity to views                                        [   ]     [      ]   [       ]   [    ]   [   ]
   f)   Adaptability to changing uses                             [   ]     [      ]   [       ]   [    ]   [   ]
   g)   Security                                                  [   ]     [      ]   [       ]   [    ]   [   ]
   h)   ADA Compliance                                            [   ]     [      ]   [       ]   [    ]   [   ]
   i)   Maintenance                                               [   ]     [      ]   [       ]   [    ]   [   ]
   j)   Relationship of spaces/layout                             [   ]     [      ]   [       ]   [    ]   [   ]
   k)   Quality of building materials
        (1) Floors                                                [ ]       [ ]        [ ]         [ ]      [ ]
        (2) Walls                                                 [ ]       [ ]        [ ]         [ ]      [ ]
        (3) Ceilings                                              [ ]       [ ]        [ ]         [ ]      [ ]
   l)   Other: Specific issues in universal
        design                                                    [ ]       [ ]        [ ]         [ ]      [ ]



2) Please rate the overall quality of the building site:
                                                    EX                          G          F           P    N/A
   a) Vehicular access                              [ ]                     [    ]     [       ]   [    ]   [ ]
   b) Parking                                       [ ]                     [    ]     [       ]   [    ]   [ ]
   c) Delivery                                      [ ]                     [    ]     [       ]   [    ]   [ ]
   d) Waste Removal                                 [ ]                     [    ]     [       ]   [    ]   [ ]
   e) Aesthetic quality of views                    [ ]                     [    ]     [       ]   [    ]   [ ]
   f) Landscaping                                   [ ]                     [    ]     [       ]   [    ]   [ ]
   g) Pedestrian Access                             [ ]                     [    ]     [       ]   [    ]   [ ]
   h) Other: Specific issues in
      universal design                              [ ]                     [ ]        [ ]         [ ]      [ ]
236                                                                 UNIVERSAL design        Part 2 North America




      3) In an average work week, how many hours do you spend in the following types of
         spaces (specify). Note: At the bottom line, please total the numbers of hours
         spent in each type of space.

         Space A      -------------------------------------------------

         Space B      -------------------------------------------------


         Space C      -------------------------------------------------


         Space D - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -


         Space E      -------------------------------------------------

         HOURS                            A                 B                   C                  D            E
         0–5                             [ ]            [       ]           [       ]          [       ]       [ ]
         6–10                            [ ]            [       ]           [       ]          [       ]       [ ]
         11–15                           [ ]            [       ]           [       ]          [       ]       [ ]
         16–20                           [ ]            [       ]           [       ]          [       ]       [ ]
         21–25                           [ ]            [       ]           [       ]          [       ]       [ ]
         26–30                           [ ]            [       ]           [       ]          [       ]       [ ]
         31–35                           [ ]            [       ]           [       ]          [       ]       [ ]
         36–40                           [ ]            [       ]           [       ]          [       ]       [ ]
         40+                             [ ]            [       ]           [       ]          [       ]       [ ]


      4) Please rate the overall quality of the following areas in the building:

                                              EX                G                   F                  P       N/A
         a) Space Category A                  [ ]           [       ]           [       ]          [       ]   [ ]
         b) Space Category B                  [ ]           [       ]           [       ]          [       ]   [ ]
         c) Space Category C                  [ ]           [       ]           [       ]          [       ]   [ ]
         d) Space Category D                  [ ]           [       ]           [       ]          [       ]   [ ]
         e) Space Category E                  [ ]           [       ]           [       ]          [       ]   [ ]
         f) Restrooms                         [ ]           [       ]           [       ]          [       ]   [ ]
         g) Storage                           [ ]           [       ]           [       ]          [       ]   [ ]
         h) Elevator(s)                       [ ]           [       ]           [       ]          [       ]   [ ]
         i) Stairs/Corridors                  [ ]           [       ]           [       ]          [       ]   [ ]
         j) Parking                           [ ]           [       ]           [       ]          [       ]   [ ]
         k) Other: Specific issues
            in universal design               [ ]           [ ]                 [ ]                [ ]         [ ]
           Wolfgang Preiser
     University of Cincinnati   Infusing Universal Design Into the Curriculum                            237
                        USA




5) Please rate the overall quality of Space Category A in terms of the following:

                                          EX                   G               F           P       N/A
  a) Adequacy of Space                    [ ]              [       ]       [       ]   [       ]   [ ]
  b) Lighting                             [ ]              [       ]       [       ]   [       ]   [ ]
  c) Acoustics                            [ ]              [       ]       [       ]   [       ]   [ ]
  d) Temperature                          [ ]              [       ]       [       ]   [       ]   [ ]
  e) Air Movement                         [ ]              [       ]       [       ]   [       ]   [ ]
  f) Odor                                 [ ]              [       ]       [       ]   [       ]   [ ]
  g) Aesthetic Appeal                     [ ]              [       ]       [       ]   [       ]   [ ]
  h) Security                             [ ]              [       ]       [       ]   [       ]   [ ]
  i) Flexibility of Use                   [ ]              [       ]       [       ]   [       ]   [ ]
  j) Other: Specific issues in
      universal design                    [ ]              [ ]             [ ]         [ ]         [ ]


6) Please rate the overall quality of Space Category B in terms of the following:

                                          EX                   G               F           P       N/A
  a) Adequacy of Space                    [ ]              [       ]       [       ]   [       ]   [ ]
  b) Lighting                             [ ]              [       ]       [       ]   [       ]   [ ]
  c) Acoustics                            [ ]              [       ]       [       ]   [       ]   [ ]
  d) Temperature                          [ ]              [       ]       [       ]   [       ]   [ ]
  e) Air Movement                         [ ]              [       ]       [       ]   [       ]   [ ]
  f) Odor                                 [ ]              [       ]       [       ]   [       ]   [ ]
  g) Aesthetic Appeal                     [ ]              [       ]       [       ]   [       ]   [ ]
  h) Security                             [ ]              [       ]       [       ]   [       ]   [ ]
  i) Flexibility of Use                   [ ]              [       ]       [       ]   [       ]   [ ]
  j) Other: Specific issues in
      universal design                    [ ]              [ ]             [ ]         [ ]         [ ]


7) Please rate the overall quality of Space Category C in terms of the following:

                                          EX                   G               F           P       N/A
  a) Adequacy of Space                    [ ]              [       ]       [       ]   [       ]   [ ]
  b) Lighting                             [ ]              [       ]       [       ]   [       ]   [ ]
  c) Acoustics                            [ ]              [       ]       [       ]   [       ]   [ ]
  d) Temperature                          [ ]              [       ]       [       ]   [       ]   [ ]
  e) Air Movement                         [ ]              [       ]       [       ]   [       ]   [ ]
  f) Odorv                                [ ]              [       ]       [       ]   [       ]   [ ]
  g) Aesthetic Appeal                     [ ]              [       ]       [       ]   [       ]   [ ]
  h) Security                             [ ]              [       ]       [       ]   [       ]   [ ]
  i) Flexibility of Use                   [ ]              [       ]       [       ]   [       ]   [ ]
  j) Other: Specific issues in
      universal design                    [ ]              [ ]             [ ]         [ ]         [ ]
238                                                              UNIVERSAL design         Part 2 North America




      8) Please rate the overall quality of Space Category D in terms of the following:

                                                 EX                 G             F                P       N/A
        a)   Adequacy of Space                   [ ]            [       ]     [       ]        [       ]   [ ]
        b)   Lighting                            [ ]            [       ]     [       ]        [       ]   [ ]
        c)   Acoustics                           [ ]            [       ]     [       ]        [       ]   [ ]
        d)   Temperature                         [ ]            [       ]     [       ]        [       ]   [ ]
        e)   Air Movement                        [ ]            [       ]     [       ]        [       ]   [ ]
        f)   Odor                                [ ]            [       ]     [       ]        [       ]   [ ]
        g)   Aesthetic Appeal                    [ ]            [       ]     [       ]        [       ]   [ ]
        h)   Security                            [ ]            [       ]     [       ]        [       ]   [ ]
        i)   Flexibility of Use                  [ ]            [       ]     [       ]        [       ]   [ ]
        j)   Other: Specific issues in
             universal design                    [ ]            [ ]           [ ]              [ ]         [ ]


      9) Please rate the overall quality of Space Category E in terms of the following:

                                                 EX                 G             F                P       N/A
        a)   Adequacy of Space                   [ ]            [       ]     [       ]        [       ]   [ ]
        b)   Lighting                            [ ]            [       ]     [       ]        [       ]   [ ]
        c)   Acoustics                           [ ]            [       ]     [       ]        [       ]   [ ]
        d)   Temperature                         [ ]            [       ]     [       ]        [       ]   [ ]
        e)   Air Movement                        [ ]            [       ]     [       ]        [       ]   [ ]
        f)   Odor                                [ ]            [       ]     [       ]        [       ]   [ ]
        g)   Aesthetic Appeal                    [ ]            [       ]     [       ]        [       ]   [ ]
        h)   Security                            [ ]            [       ]     [       ]        [       ]   [ ]
        i)   Flexibility of Use                  [ ]            [       ]     [       ]        [       ]   [ ]
        j)   Other: Specific issues in
             universal design                    [ ]            [ ]           [ ]              [ ]         [ ]


      10) Please select and rank, in order of importance, universal design features which
          are needed but currently lacking in your building:


         1) - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

         2) - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

         3) - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
          Wolfgang Preiser
    University of Cincinnati    Infusing Universal Design Into the Curriculum                                 239
                       USA




11) Please make suggestions in regards to future universal design related improve-
    ments in the building delivery process of your building type (e.g., more user
    input, better programs, etc.)

    -------------------------------------------------------
    -------------------------------------------------------
    -------------------------------------------------------

12) Demographic Information:

    a) Your Room #/Building Area: - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
    b) Your Position: - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
    c) # of years with the present organization: - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -



                               Checklist Of Useful Documents

                               Client-Related Information
                                1) Client mission statement, organizational chart, and staffing.
                                2) Initial program from building.
                                3) As-built floor plans (may require updating).
                                4) Space assignments and schedules.
                                5) Building-related accident reports.
                                6) Records of theft, vandalism, and security problems.
                                7) Maintenance/repair records from facility manager.
                                8) Universal design and ADA-related audits.
                                9) Energy audits or review comments from heating/cooling
                                   plant manager.
                               10) Any other feedback concerning the building which may be
                                   on record.

                               Building Type-Related Information
                               1) Identification of select recent, similar and excellent facilities
                                  in the region or country.
                               2) Programs and other pertinent information on the building
                                  type being evaluated.
                               3) Identification and assessment of state-of-the-art literature
                                  (e.g., technical manuals and design guides).
                               4) Building type-specific performance criteria derived from the
                                  seven Universal Design Principles.
240                        UNIVERSAL design   Part 2 North America




      Appendix 2
      Syllabus for “Universal Design:
      Case Studies in Architecture”
      School of Architecture & Interior Design
        Architecture 23-301-547
      College of Design, Architecture, Art & Planning
        Instructor: Wolfgang F.E. Preiser

      1. Purpose: Why is Universal Design so important? In a
         global and aging marketplace, which is rapidly growing
         smaller through technology and e-commerce, there is a
         need for a range of human-centered products, facilities,
         amenities that people need and want. People worldwide
         are living about 20 years longer. In the United States
         alone, there are over 50 million people who are perma-
         nently disabled, and everyone is likely at some time to
         experience disability as a mismatch between themselves
         and their environment. The need has never been greater to
         design buildings, rooms, public spaces, and products that
         can be used by all people. This course fosters experiential
         learning through immersion into field trips and research
         methodology for exploring the effects of built environ-
         ments on their users. This may include actual evaluation
         and field studies of public places and buildings.
         Involvement in actual field research situations will be
         preceded by the identification and comparative analysis of
         key concepts in the research literature.

      2. Approach: Every week there will be one session with lec-
         ture presentations by the instructor(s) and one session for
         student presentations and discussion. In the lecture pre-
         sentations, selected articles from the course text and re-
         search literature, as well as other examples, will be used to
         provide an overview of the field of universal design. Case
         study examples on different building types and user types
         will be identified in the research literature, including rese-
         arch journals, conference proceedings, reference works,
         and relevant data bases. Students will identify research
         topics of his/her choice, and will conduct initial readings
         into this topic area. This will be followed by a systematic
         on-line computerized literature search. A project proposal
         will be prepared prior to mid-quarter. It will be critiqued
         and executed by the students during the second half of the
         quarter.
      Wolfgang Preiser
University of Cincinnati   Infusing Universal Design Into the Curriculum                   241
                   USA



                           3. Topics: Principles of Universal Design; Research Methods;
                              Setting/Building Types; People Types; other.

                           4. Requirements:
                              – Literature search on a topic in the course text.
                              – A literature review (4+ pages, double-spaced) on three
                                or more articles on universal design. A summary of
                                findings will be presented in class.
                              – Project proposal (2 pages, double-spaced)
                              – Mid-term literature essay (5+ pages, double-spaced) on
                                universal design issues pertaining to the final project.
                              – Final project report (10+ pages, double-spaced)

                           5. Readings: The required text is the Universal Design
                              Handbook. In addition, books on a variety of research
                              methods are available on loan from the library collection.
                              Recommended books for this course are Inquiry by
                              Design and Methods in Environmental and Behavior
                              Research.
242   UNIVERSAL design   Part 2 North America




                                                Photo: FotoKnutsen AS
           Molly Follette Story
North Carolina State University   Distance Education in Universal Design                               243
                           USA




                                  2.4 Distance Education
                                  in Universal Design
                                  Molly Follette Story, M.S., The Center for Universal Design,
                                  North Carolina State University, U.S.A.


                                  A Course Is Born
                                  When North Carolina State University decided to increase its
                                  investment in distance education, the university provided fun-
                                  ding for the development of Internet courses to several depart-
                                  ments to support the instructor’s time and the purchase of
                                  appropriate web page authoring software. The university also
                                  offered a summer course to train instructors in the process of
                                  developing such courses.

                                  The College of Design recognized that universal design would
                                  be a good topic for a distance education course. This chapter
                                  describes the Internet course that was developed by the author
                                  with this funding during the latter half of 1999.

                                  The Principles of Universal Design
                                  Interest in universal design is increasing dramatically world-
                                  wide among design practitioners, builders and manufacturers
                                  and particularly, at institutions of higher learning. As a result,
                                  the demand for courses on universal design is increasing.

                                  One of the topics of interest is the Principles of Universal
                                  Design whose development was coordinated by staff of the
                                  Center for Universal Design at North Carolina State University.
                                  Every year, many visitors come to the Center to learn about its
                                  work, particularly the work of the late Ronald L. Mace, the
                                  Center’s founder.

                                  The Principles of Universal Design were one result of a
                                  Research and Demonstration Project conducted from 1994 to
                                  1997 at the Center for Universal Design. The project was fun-
                                  ded by the U.S. Department of Education’s National Institute on
                                  Disability and Rehabilitation Research (NIDRR). The authors
                                  of the Principles included Ron Mace and nine of his colleagues,
                                  a working group of architects, product designers, engineers, and
244                        UNIVERSAL design   Part 2 North America




      environmental design researchers from six different U.S. insti-
      tutions: Bettye Rose Connell, Mike Jones, Jim Mueller, Abir
      Mullick, Elaine Ostroff, Jon Sanford, Ed Steinfeld, Molly Story,
      and Gregg Vanderheiden.

      The seven Principles of Universal Design were created to sup-
      port the evaluation of existing designs, guide the design process
      and educate both designers and consumers about the characte-
      ristics of more usable products and environments.

      Course Description
      The North Carolina State University distance education course
      described in this chapter was structured around the Principles of
      Universal Design and was designated ID 492, Special Topics in
      Universal Design. Because it is the home department of the
      instructor, the course is hosted by the department of Industrial
      Design; however, the course is appropriate for all design disci-
      plines.

      The course objectives were described as follows:
        The purpose of this course is to give students a basic under-
        standing of the concepts and Principles of Universal Design.
        It presents the benefits of the universal design approach for
        people with disabilities and for all individuals. Students will
        be introduced to the history of universal design, the broad
        range of human abilities, and numerous real-world examples
        of designs that satisfy the Principles. By the end of the
        course, students should have an appreciation for the diver-
        sity of the human race and be able to recognize universal
        designs as well as usability obstacles that have been desig-
        ned into other products and environments.

      The course, taught entirely via the Internet, is an elective avai-
      lable to anyone at the university as well as anyone who registers
      with the university to take continuing education courses. The
      course runs one semester of seventeen weeks and offers three
      credit hours to registered students.

      The course is based on and taught from the book, co-authored
      by the instructor, The Universal Design File: Designing for
      People of All Ages and Abilities (Story, Mueller and Mace,
      1998). Chapter 1 of the book presents a brief history of univer-
      sal design including the relevant legislation passed in the
      United States in the second half of the 20th Century. Chapter 2
           Molly Follette Story
North Carolina State University   Distance Education in Universal Design                                245
                           USA



                                  discusses the range of all measures of human ability and the
                                  factors that can affect their variability. Chapter 3 of the book
                                  lists and explores in depth the seven Principles of Universal
                                  Design and the 29 guidelines associated with them. The chapter
                                  includes two to five photographic examples of each of the
                                  guidelines, representing all design disciplines from landscape
                                  design to product details and from architecture to software.
                                  Chapter 4 presents seven case studies, one related to each
                                  Principle, of successful universal design implementations.

                                  Course Schedule
                                  This course is taught completely asynchronously over a period
                                  of seventeen weeks. The class never meets and the students are
                                  never all online at the same time. Each Monday, the instructor
                                  posts a new web page with links to any additional materials eit-
                                  her on other new pages on the course site or somewhere else on
                                  the Internet. The students may work at their own convenience
                                  and pace at any time during the week but the assignment for
                                  each week is due the following Sunday.

                                  In the first few weeks of the course, the students become fami-
                                  liar with the online procedures and technology and the course
                                  content is introductory. The middle portion of the course is
                                  dedicated to exploring the Principles of Universal Design. At
                                  the end of the course, the students must tie together everything
                                  they have learned.

                                  The following section presents in detail the content provided by
                                  the instructor and the work submitted by the students in every
                                  week of the course.

                                  Week 1. Overview of the Course;
                                  Introduction to the Medium
                                  The course deliberately begins slowly to allow the students to
                                  get accustomed to the electronic medium and methods of com-
                                  munication. Some of the students are quite experienced but
                                  others are novices and need time to learn the techniques and get
                                  comfortable.

                                  The assignment for the first week is for each student to intro-
                                  duce him- or herself to the rest of the class on a web-based
                                  Forum provided by the university. The Forum is located behind
                                  a firewall that requires a university user identification and pass-
                                  word for entry. This security measure assures the privacy of the
246                        UNIVERSAL design   Part 2 North America




      students from anyone outside the university. The Forum allows
      anyone that has access to post new questions or respond to
      questions posted by someone else such as the instructor. The
      most remarkable consequence of this private arena is that the
      students write with surprising candor about themselves and
      their experiences.

      Most of the students who take this course are in their 30s and 40s
      and have professional experience in a related field such as physi-
      cal therapy, home modification, or job accommodation. These
      individuals typically desire to increase their knowledge of univer-
      sal design so they may improve their current work or start a new
      career. Some of the students have disabilities or have family
      members with disabilities; these participants enrich the course for
      everyone with their personal perspectives on the topic.

      Week 2. Introduction to the Topic and Appropriate
      Terminology
      In the second week, the instructor introduces the focal topic of
      the course by defining disability, accessible design, and univer-
      sal design. She also provides students with the appropriate
      vocabulary to use when talking about people with disabilities.

      Two contemporary definitions of disability are provided. The
      first definition is included in the new paradigm of disability
      created by the United States Department of Education’s
      National Institute on Disability and Rehabilitation Research
      (NIDRR). It states that rather than being a characteristic of an
      individual, disability is

        “… a product of an interaction between characteristics (e.g.,
        conditions or impairments, functional status, or personal and
        social qualities) of the individual and characteristics of the
        natural, built, cultural, and social environments. The con-
        struct of disability is located on a continuum from enable-
        ment to disablement. Personal characteristics, as well as
        environmental ones, may be enabling or disabling, and the
        relative degree fluctuates depending on condition, time, and
        setting. Disability is a contextual variable, dynamic over time
        and circumstance. Environments may be physically acces-
        sible or inaccessible, culturally inclusive or exclusive,
        accommodating or unaccommodating, and supportive or
        unsupportive. For example, on a societal level, institutions
        and the built environment were designed for a limited seg-
        ment of the population” (NIDRR, 1999, page 68578).
           Molly Follette Story
North Carolina State University   Distance Education in Universal Design                              247
                           USA



                                  The second definition of disability is provided by the World
                                  Health Organization (WHO) in its classification called the
                                  ICIDH-2, The International Classification of Impairments,
                                  Activities, and Participation. It is described to be “…a multi-
                                  purpose classification designed to serve different sectors and to
                                  provide a common framework for understanding the dimensions
                                  of disablement and functioning at three different levels: body,
                                  person, and society” (World Health Organization, 1998). In the
                                  document, WHO presents a matrix of dimensions of the
                                  ICIDH-2. Along the horizontal axis are: Impairments,
                                  Activities, Participation, and Contextual Factors. Along the ver-
                                  tical axis are: Functioning, Characteristics, Positive Aspects,
                                  and Negative Aspects. Table 1 below presents interactions
                                  between personal and environmental characteristics and their
                                  effects on participation.

                                  These two definitions of disability are complex but comple-
                                  mentary and provide an appropriate perspective from which to
                                  view disability throughout the course.


 TABLE 1. Overview of the Dimensions of the ICIDH-2, The International
 Classification of Impairments, Activities, and Participation (World Health Organization,
 1998)
                        IMPAIRMENTS ACTIVITIES                      PARTICIPATION   CONTEXTUAL
                                                                                    FACTORS
 FUNCTIONING            AT BODY             AT PERSON               AT SOCIAL       (…IN INTERAC
                        LEVEL               LEVEL                   LEVEL           TION WITH…)
                                                                                    ENVIRONMEN-
                                                                                    TAL FACTORS
                                                                                    AND PERSONAL
                                                                                    FACTORS
 CHARACTE               BODY                PERSON’S                INVOLVEMENT     FEATURES OF
 RISTICS                FUNCTION;           DAILY                   IN THE          THE PHYSICAL,
                        BODY                ACTIVITIES              SITUATION       SOCIAL
                        STRUCTURE                                                   ATTITUDINAL
                                                                                    WORLD
 POSITIVE               FUNCTIONAL          ACTIVITY               PARTICIPATION    FACILITATORS
 ASPECT                 AND
                        STRUCTURAL
                        INTEGRITY
 NEGATIVE               IMPAIRMENT          ACTIVITY               PARTICIPATION    BARRIERS
 ASPECT                                     LIMITATION             RESTRICTION
248                        UNIVERSAL design   Part 2 North America




      The instructor then presents a definition of accessible design:
        Accessible design is design to accommodate specific indivi-
        duals or groups of individuals with disabilities. Because it is
        the ONLY solution for some problems and some users, acces-
        sible design will always be necessary, at least in certain situ-
        ations. Specialized design is usually more expensive than
        universal design and because it is atypical, accessible design
        may segregate and stigmatize the users it is designed to
        accommodate.

      She also presents a definition of universal design:
        Universal design is a way of designing products and environ-
        ments so they are usable by and appealing to everyone
        regardless of age, ability or circumstance. Universal design
        accommodates people with disabilities, older people, children
        and others who are non-average in a way that is not stigma-
        tizing and benefits all users.

      Then she contrasts the two types of design:
        Universal design can be distinguished from accessible design
        in the way that the accessible features have been integrated
        into the overall design. This integration is important because
        it results in the improved general acceptability of the design
        and in the social inclusion of all individuals using the design.

      Because use of appropriate terminology and behavior are criti-
      cally important to this course, the instructor then provides links
      to two web pages that present appropriate ways to talk about
      and with people with disabilities. The labels people use to des-
      cribe others matter very much: they can be respectful or deroga-
      tive and can influence the way individuals are perceived and
      treated, and even the way individuals perceive themselves. Just
      as acceptable terms for ethnic groups have changed over time,
      so have terms for individuals with disabilities.

      The first site about appropriate terminology is by Brown
      University’s Office of Disability Support Services and is an
      adaptation of an article called “Unhandicapping Our Language”
      by Paul K. Longmore, Ph.D. and Diane B. Piastro (1988).
      Brown’s web page features a chart with three columns: the first
      column lists terms that are objectionable, the second column
      explains why each is objectionable, and the third column offers
      a preferable replacement term.

      The second page is on the site of the Inclusion Network of
           Molly Follette Story
North Carolina State University   Distance Education in Universal Design                               249
                           USA



                                  Greater Cincinnati, Ohio and is called “What is Inclusion?”
                                  (date not indicated). The page defines inclusion, then answers
                                  the questions, “Why is Inclusion Important?” and “To Whom is
                                  Inclusion Important?” Then it presents suggestions for how to
                                  talk about people with disabilities in two sections titled
                                  “Including Friends With Disabilities” and “Putting People
                                  First.” Below that, the page offers “Top Ten Rules for
                                  Communicating with People with Disabilities.” At the bottom
                                  of the page is a short list labeled “A Legislative Look at
                                  Inclusion” that presents relevant U.S. laws and the ways they
                                  have affected inclusion of people with disabilities.

                                  The assignment for Week 2 is to answer three questions on the
                                  Forum.
                                  1. Have you ever had an awkward conversation WITH someone
                                     about his or her disability? Describe your experience.
                                  2. Have you ever had an awkward conversation ABOUT some-
                                     one and his or her disability? Describe your experience.
                                  3. Have you ever had the experience of being excluded from an
                                     activity due to disability, either your own or a companion’s?
                                     (NOTE: You are NOT required to reveal your own disability.)
                                     Describe your experience. If you have not had the experience,
                                     did you realize that people with disabilities are excluded from
                                     many activities in our society? Please comment.

                                  Most students have had awkward conversations with or about
                                  someone and his or her disability and talking about their experi-
                                  ences helps make all class members comfortable. Some admit
                                  their lack of exposure to or even fear of talking with people
                                  who have disabilities. Some students reveal their own disabili-
                                  ties or mention that family members or friends have disabilities.
                                  The online conversation helps everyone understand that many
                                  of their experiences are common and helps them understand the
                                  perspective each student has brought to the class.

                                  Week 3. History of Universal Design and
                                  Accessibility
                                  In the third week of the course, the students are required to read
                                  three essays about the history of universal design and accessibi-
                                  lity. The first reading is Chapter One, “What is Universal
                                  Design?” from the book Strategies for Teaching Universal
                                  Design (Welch, 1995; posted on the course web site by permis-
                                  sion of the publisher). It offers a history of the movement and
                                  the terminology used to describe various efforts toward univer-
                                  sal design in the last 25 years.
250                        UNIVERSAL design   Part 2 North America




      The second reading is Chapter Two from the same book, “A
      Brief History of Disability Rights Legislation in the United
      States” by Polly Welch and Chris Palames (again, posted with
      permission). It covers laws passed in the second half of the 20th
      Century and the social and political contexts in which they were
      created.

      The third reading is Chapter One, “A Brief History of Universal
      Design”, from the course text (Story, Mueller and Mace, 1998).
      It discusses demographics that are changing, relevant federal
      legislation in the United States, the shift in approach from bar-
      rier-free to universal design, the emergence of rehabilitation
      engineering and assistive technology, changing economic con-
      ditions, and changing social climates.

      The assignment for Week 3 is to answer three questions on the
      online class forum:
      1. In what ways do you believe legislation has a positive effect
         on the practice of universal design?
      2. In what ways do you believe legislation has a negative effect
         on the practice of universal design?
      3. What motivators for universal design do you believe might
         be more effective than legislation?

      In their responses, the students made it clear that they recog-
      nized the importance of the Americans with Disabilities Act of
      1990 (ADA) in providing basic access and opportunities as well
      as raising awareness among the general public in the U.S. They
      also recognized how legislation can cause minimal compliance
      without understanding at best, and resentment of and opposition
      to legislation at worst. They also understood that educating peo-
      ple as to the benefits of universal design for all users is one of
      the best ways to motivate them to practice universal design.

      Week 4. The Range of Human Abilities
      The topic of the fourth week of the course is the range of
      human abilities. People vary a lot in their individual abilities
      and personal preferences. They are different from other people,
      from themselves as they were last year, and from themselves
      when they tried to accomplish a given task under different cir-
      cumstances. A disability can be severe or mild; permanent or
      temporary/situational; constant or episodic; apparent or invi-
      sible. Disability is a dynamic and contextual variable.

      There are three readings for this week of the online course. The
           Molly Follette Story
North Carolina State University   Distance Education in Universal Design                             251
                           USA



                                  first is on a web site of the Trace Research and Development
                                  Center at the University of Wisconsin at Madison (Trace R&D
                                  Center) and is called “A Brief Introduction to Disabilities”
                                  (Vanderheiden and Vanderheiden, 1991). The site presents
                                  information on four major categories of impairment: visual
                                  impairments, hearing impairments, physical impairments, and
                                  cognitive/language impairments.

                                  To provide a sense of the statistics of disability in the United
                                  States, the second reading is the “Highlights” section of the
                                  report, “Disability in the United States; Prevalence and Causes”
                                  by LaPlante and Carlson (1996).

                                  The third reading is Chapter Three, “Understanding the
                                  Spectrum of Human Abilities”, from the course text (Story,
                                  Mueller and Mace, 1998). The chapter discusses how human
                                  abilities may differ by cause, effect, or situation in each of
                                  seven categories: cognition, vision, hearing and speech, body
                                  functions, arm function, hand function, and mobility.

                                  The assignment for Week 4 is to respond to three questions on
                                  the Forum:
                                  1. Have you ever blamed yourself when you had difficulty using
                                     a product or environment?
                                  2. Have you ever modified a product or environment to make it
                                     easier for you to use?
                                  3. What accessible features of products and environments have
                                     you found yourself using?

                                  Some said they had never done so but most students admitted
                                  they had blamed themselves before for having difficulty using a
                                  product or environment. This reaction is very common but inap-
                                  propriate, particularly in this class.

                                  Because no design will ever suit all persons perfectly under all
                                  conditions, everyone experiences designs that need to be cus-
                                  tomized. Most examples cited by the class were examples of
                                  products that were not well designed for large portions of the
                                  population. Some designs could have been made easier for eve-
                                  ryone to use regardless of their capabilities; others could have
                                  been made to be adjustable.

                                  Everyone in the class could identify some “accessible” features
                                  they used frequently such as lever door handles, OXO Good
                                  Grips© kitchen utensils, and various ramps. However, other
252                        UNIVERSAL design   Part 2 North America




      features are often overlooked such as clear signage, spoken
      announcements on trains or subways, and public restrooms wit-
      hout entry doors. The instructor pointed out that the students
      probably had also used many “universal” features without
      recognizing them: remote control devices, speakerphones with
      volume controls, garage door openers, vibrating pagers, electro-
      nic programmable thermostats, etc.

      Week 5. The Diversity that Surrounds You
      The topic of the fifth week of the course is the effects of design
      on disability. As Gregg Vanderheiden pointed out in a white
      paper distributed at the RESNA 1997 conference in Pittsburgh,
      Pennsylvania, there are three ways to address the gap between
      an individual’s capabilities and the demands of the built envi-
      ronment:

      1. Change the individual;
      2. Provide the individual with tools that he or she can use;
         and/or
      3. Change the environment (Vanderheiden, 1997).

      The assignment for Weeks 5 and 6 of the course is for each stu-
      dent to go out into his or her own community and meet some-
      one new. The instructor asks each student to make the
      acquaintance of someone who is different from himself and, if
      he often spends time with people who have disabilities, some-
      one who is different from others he already knows. This indivi-
      dual would serve as the student’s “user/expert,” someone who
      lives with and is expert at using the built environment with his
      or her particular disability. The user/expert should be someone
      the student doesn’t already know, to reduce the personal com-
      plexities and the possibility that he or she will tell the student
      what he wants to hear. Each student is asked to spend some
      time with his user/expert in two locations: one place the
      user/expert knows well such as his home, work or school, and
      one he doesn’t know well such as a store or restaurant he’s
      never visited. The instructor stresses that the purpose of the
      exercise is to assess the effects of design on disability (and not
      the disability itself).

      Each student then writes a report of the experience, answering
      the following questions:

      1. Who was your user/expert? Where and how did you meet
         him or her?
           Molly Follette Story
North Carolina State University   Distance Education in Universal Design                               253
                           USA



                                  2. Where did you go? What did you do there?
                                  3. What tools did you notice your user/expert using to make
                                     products and environments more usable?
                                  4. What modifications did you notice that your user/expert had
                                     made to products and environments?
                                  5. Did your perception of your user/expert’s disability differ
                                     when you were in each of the two locations and if so, how?
                                  6. How would you characterize the interactions your user/expert
                                     had with other individuals in each of the two locations (if
                                     any)?
                                  7. How would you characterize your own attitudes and emoti-
                                     ons when you were with your user/expert in each of the two
                                     locations?
                                  8. What would you conclude from this exercise regarding the
                                     effects of design on disability?

                                  The students seemed to enjoy and learn a lot from this assign-
                                  ment. Even students who had disabilities reported that they
                                  noticed some environmental barriers for the first time. Some
                                  students saw significant differences in the behavior of their
                                  user/experts in the two locations visited.

                                  More than anything else, this assignment forces the students to
                                  see the built environment through someone else’s eyes and
                                  recognize obstacles they would otherwise overlook. Observing
                                  the lived experience of someone with a disability and discus-
                                  sing it with him or her is much more powerful, meaningful and
                                  memorable than any simulation exercise ever could be.

                                  Week 6. The Principles of Universal Design
                                  In the sixth week of the course, the instructor introduces the
                                  Principles of Universal Design (The Center for Universal
                                  Design, 1997) (see appendix to the introduction):
                                  Principle 1.Equitable Use
                                  Principle 2. Flexibility in Use
                                  Principle 3. Simple and Intuitive Use
                                  Principle 4. Perceptible Information
                                  Principle 5. Tolerance for Error
                                  Principle 6. Low Physical Effort
                                  Principle 7. Size and Space for Approach and Use
                                  The instructor presents a brief history of the creation process of
                                  the Principles of Universal Design (in which she was involved)
                                  and explains their purpose.

                                  For the assignment this week, the students are asked to read the
254                        UNIVERSAL design   Part 2 North America




      beginning of Chapter 3, “The Principles of Universal Design
      and Their Application” of the course text (Story, Mueller and
      Mace, 1998). Chapter 3 presents each Principle accompanied
      by two to five photographs to illustrate each of its associated
      guidelines.

      (The user/expert reports begun in Week 5 are due this week.)

      Weeks 7 to 14. Principles 1 through 7
      In Weeks 7 through 14 (with a one-week semester break in the
      middle), the instructor presents each Principle in turn and in
      depth.

      The students’ assignment for each of these seven weeks is to
      find, photograph, and critique an example that demonstrates the
      Principle under study that week. The instructor requires the fol-
      lowing:

      A. Read the sections related to Principle X (the Principle under
         study that week) of Chapter 3, “The Principles of Universal
         Design and Their Application” and Chapter 4, “Case Studies
         on Universal Design,” of the text, The Universal Design File.
      B. Select the best design example you can find of Principle X
         that is different from the ones shown in the book. The
         example can be from any design discipline including archi-
         tecture, landscape architecture, interior design,
         product/industrial design, graphic design, etc. Choose an
         example that is meaningful to you.
      C. Photograph the design example. In some cases, you may
         need to photograph more than one view of the design to
         fully communicate it to the rest of the class. Have the film
         developed into electronic images (typically, JPG format on
         disk or CD).
      D. Give a full verbal description of the example for the benefit
         of individuals with visual impairments.
      E. Write a critique of the design example.
         – Describe the positive aspects of the example: in what
            ways does this design satisfy Principle X and what makes
            this design easier to use than others?
         – Describe the negative aspects of the example: in what
            ways does this design fail to satisfy Principle X and in
            what ways does this design fall short of being universally
            usable?
      F. Send the image(s), verbal description(s) and critique to the
         instructor via e-mail.
           Molly Follette Story
North Carolina State University   Distance Education in Universal Design                               255
                           USA



                                  In these seven weeks, the students in the course study universal
                                  design at the detail level. As they apply each Principle, they
                                  begin to recognize the many issues imbedded within. The first
                                  task is to photograph the example in a way that will communi-
                                  cate it to others. The next task is to write an effective verbal
                                  description of each image, which is a difficult challenge. (What
                                  does the image show? What about this design is relevant? What
                                  is not pictured but is still important to the design? If you could
                                  not see the image, would you be able to imagine it from this
                                  description?) After that, the students typically assess their
                                  examples against the guidelines associated with each Principle.
                                  Sometimes the students overlook obstacles but by applying the
                                  guidelines, the students are often surprised to recognize them.

                                  To demonstrate the content of these seven weeks of the course,
                                  each of the Principles of Universal Design is listed below along
                                  with its definition and some explanatory comments made by
                                  the instructor. A brief synopsis of one example of each
                                  Principle chosen by a student who took the course follows
                                  along with the instructor’s response.


                                   Principle 1. Equitable Use
                                   The design is useful and marketable to people with diverse
                                   abilities.
                                     This means that we should create designs that appeal to
                                     everyone and offer everyone a way to participate.
                                     Principle 1 addresses making designs useful and market-
                                     able to diverse groups of users concurrently: design for
                                     all people.



                                  STUDENT EXAMPLE:
                                  Accessible hotel bathroom.
                                  This student identified several features of this room that made it
                                  more universally usable than most and she offered several sug-
                                  gestions to improve it.
                                  – Wide door (the student suggested that it should be easier to
                                    open than this one);
                                  – Lever door handle on door (it would be nice to have a door-
                                    stop);
                                  – Rocker light switch;
                                  – Smooth marble flooring;
                                  – Shower area with no threshold (a supportive tub would be a
                                    welcome addition);
256                        UNIVERSAL design   Part 2 North America




      – Padded, L-shaped bench in shower (the hotel should offer a
        roll-in shower chair available on request);
      – Wall-mounted showerhead with hose (should be located
        closer to the bench or offer two showerheads, one near the
        bench and one on the opposite wall);
      – Single-lever faucet controls in shower;
      – Paddle faucet controls at sink (room should have an additio-
        nal adjustable magnifying mirror within reach);
      – Open space rather than cabinets under the sink counter; and
      – Grab bars used as towel racks throughout the room.

      INSTRUCTOR RESPONSE:
      This is a beautiful, spacious bathroom that would work well for
      most people. I agree with your suggestions and offer a few
      more. I’d like to see a seat at the vanity that could be sat on or
      pushed under the counter, out of the way. At the sink, I would
      prefer single-lever faucets to the paddle style because they are
      easier to control with a single hand. It might also be helpful to
      locate the faucet at the side of the sink so it is not as long a
      reach. The plastic drain piping under the sink is a good feature
      because it is less likely to scald skin that comes into contact
      with it, although any kind of piping is unattractive to look at
      and could have been shrouded from view.

      I hope this bathroom was available in the mirror-image confi-
      guration, as well, for the benefit of individuals who need grab
      bar support on the left side when using either the toilet or the
      shower. This is a right-handed room.


       Principle 2. Flexibility in Use
       The design accommodates a wide range of individual prefe-
       rences and abilities.
          This means that we should provide for multiple ways of
          doing things. People ought to be able to use the design in
          any way that suits them personally. Adaptability is one
          way to make designs universally usable. Principle 2
          addresses individual needs: design for each person indi-
          vidually.



      STUDENT EXAMPLE:
      Children’s playground.
      This student selected a children’s playground that had been
      designed and built to accommodate a wide diversity of children
           Molly Follette Story
North Carolina State University   Distance Education in Universal Design                                257
                           USA



                                  and support many different play modes. It included many diffe-
                                  rent types of play areas such as a platform with sufficient space
                                  to contain a wheelchair, multiple slides, and several sets of
                                  overhead bars to facilitate moving around using the hands. In
                                  addition, the material covering the ground under the play struc-
                                  ture was a thick, dense, resilient material (to reduce injury) with
                                  a smooth but textured surface (for easy rolling) that was also
                                  porous (for effective drainage).

                                  INSTRUCTOR RESPONSE:
                                  This playground offers kids a wide variety of ways to play,
                                  dependent on their preferences more than their abilities. It sti-
                                  mulates the senses with its many colors, textures, sounds, mo-
                                  tions, and, I presume, smells! It can be used in a different way
                                  each time a child visits, which will stimulate his imagination and
                                  creativity. Children can comfortably play by themselves or with
                                  many others. This is an excellent example of Flexibility in Use.


                                   Principle 3. Simple and Intuitive Use
                                   Use of the design is easy to understand, regardless of the
                                   user’s experience, knowledge, language skills, or current
                                   concentration level.
                                     This means that we should make things work the way you
                                     would expect them to work. Principle 3 addresses the
                                     cognitive issues of design use. A new user should be able
                                     to understand how to use the design the first time.



                                  STUDENT EXAMPLE:
                                  Microsoft Word Wizard©
                                  This student chose the “Wizard” feature built into Microsoft’s
                                  “Word” word processing software application that provides on-
                                  screen help. She thought it was a good example of this Principle
                                  because the feature was easy to use and provided as much assis-
                                  tance as the user required. A box appeared on the screen that
                                  asked questions and offered choices of actions to guide the user
                                  in using the application. The user could either click an option or
                                  turn off the feature and proceed independently.

                                  INSTRUCTOR RESPONSE:
                                  Early word processing software was simpler to use because the
                                  software was less sophisticated and powerful. “Cutting” and
                                  “Pasting” were new computer concepts but their names were
                                  familiar and descriptive. I remember how satisfying was the
258                        UNIVERSAL design   Part 2 North America




      one-to-one correspondence between the screen image and the
      ink-jet printer output, so WYSIWYG (for “What You See Is What
      You Get,” pronounced “wizzywig”) was the rule of the day. You
      could turn single pixels on or off and produce exactly what you
      wanted, crude though the resolution was.

      These days, word processing software is complicated, indeed.
      The good news is, computer users can employ only those fea-
      tures they want. In my experience, individuals learn a set of
      “tricks” and stick with those. Sometimes people who work
      together share their tricks and the whole group operates at a
      higher level. Very few people know all the features of any soft-
      ware package. Real-time help or tutoring such as Microsoft’s
      various “Wizards” (which are also available in their other soft-
      ware, such as Excel and PowerPoint, etc.) can be very helpful to
      new users or individuals who are employing features they don’t
      often use. While I find them annoying in Word, I use them in
      Excel when I’m trying to write an equation and don’t know the
      appropriate format or when creating graphs from data. A user
      can also set up the computer to read these dialog boxes aloud
      when they appear, in a choice of voices!

       We have come to interpret “feedback” rather generously. In
      many cases, the feedback you get to indicate success is that the
      thing you were trying to achieve happens. This is a good exam-
      ple of cognitive support from a design.


       Principle 4. Perceptible Information
       The design communicates necessary information to the
       user, regardless of ambient conditions or the user’s sensory
       abilities.
         This means that we should provide for multiple modes of
         input and output. Principle 4 addresses the SENSORY
         issues of designs. (For design applications, we are prima-
         rily concerned with limitations of sight, hearing, and
         tactile sensitivity and less with limitations of smell and
         taste.)



      STUDENT EXAMPLE:
      Automobile graphic information module.
      The graphic information module on the dashboard of this student’s
      automobile was his selection to exemplify Principle 4. It used
      understandable graphic symbols and warning lights in differing
           Molly Follette Story
North Carolina State University   Distance Education in Universal Design                                  259
                           USA



                                  colors. The module warned the driver of problems with the doors
                                  and lift gate latches, the sunroof, and the lamps for the headlights,
                                  parking, tail and brake lights, and imminent frost conditions
                                  (“ICE”). The use of graphic symbols communicated effectively
                                  with users at a glance regardless of their language skills, the icons
                                  and lettering used were easy to see, and the colors used helped
                                  communicate the type and seriousness of the information.

                                  The student recommended that visual alerts could flash to make
                                  them recognized faster. He also suggested that warnings might
                                  be more effective if sound were used to alert the driver in addi-
                                  tion to the visual indications. He commented that spoken words
                                  might be helpful, although the challenge of offering a choice of
                                  several languages would be substantial.

                                  INSTRUCTOR RESPONSE:
                                  When we consider the driver of a car, total lack of vision is not
                                  a possibility although sight limitations such as presbyopia (age-
                                  related far-sightedness) are likely for many drivers. Hearing
                                  limitations are common, especially since in addition to dealing
                                  with road noise many drivers often talk with passengers, listen
                                  to the radio, and/or talk on a cellular telephone. It is important
                                  to provide information to drivers both visually and audibly.

                                  The use of icons instead of words is a good way to communicate
                                  information quickly. Icons take less cognitive processing than
                                  words because there is a closer match; words like “DOOR
                                  AJAR” must be interpreted. For this reason, the illuminated
                                  word “ICE” might be better understood if accompanied by a
                                  snowflake symbol which has come to be understood to connote
                                  freezing temperatures. Redundant audible signals can be quite
                                  helpful for the reasons you suggest. Voice alerts are available
                                  on some cars, but as you point out, they require the user to
                                  know the spoken language – and they can become annoying.


                                    Principle 5. Tolerance for Error
                                    The design minimizes hazards and the adverse consequen-
                                    ces of accidental or unintended actions.
                                      This means that we should make it difficult to make a
                                      mistake, but if someone does, he should not hurt himself
                                      or the product. Everyone makes mistakes; but designs
                                      should be forgiving. Whenever possible, mistakes should
                                      be reversible or at least cause no harm.
260                         UNIVERSAL design   Part 2 North America




      STUDENT EXAMPLE:
      Rented industrial personnel lift.
      This student chose to photograph and discuss an industrial lift
      her boyfriend had rented to use in his job installing a new sign
      high up on the outside wall of a building. She was surprised
      that such a device was available for rent, given the considerable
      potential risk involved in its use by individuals without training.
      Because of this risk, however, the machine was well designed
      and labeled for use by novice operators.

      The industrial lift would not operate unless the four legs on the
      base were adjusted so that the lift platform was level and each
      of its legs was locked in place. To assist during initial set-up
      and adjustment, a green light was provided for each leg that
      would illuminate when it was properly adjusted. Operating the
      lift required that the unit be plugged into a source of electrical
      power and the unit be turned on. Raising the bucket of the lift
      required the operator to pull out one button (“Enable”) and then
      press another button with one hand while turning a knob with
      the other. The student commented that these procedures were
      cumbersome and would not be possible for many people but
      they served to assure the user that “if the basket rises, you’ve
      done everything right.”

      INSTRUCTOR RESPONSE:
      While this lift would not be usable by many people, its safety
      features still allow us to have a good discussion of Tolerance
      for Error.

      The lift manufacturer thought through the process of use well
      and, as you say, the lift will not operate unless everything is in
      order. The “DANGER” panel is certainly daunting especially
      for individuals who cannot read English but I’m sure they were
      more concerned with reducing their legal liability than commu-
      nicating particularly well. Where they used icons (on the
      instructions and some of the controls), they did it well but they
      didn’t use them everywhere they could have.

      The buttons seem large and easy to push, even with the side or
      heel of the hand, which is good. The red color of the “Enable”
      button communicates well that it is the one that should be
      pushed to disable the unit if need be. It is not ideal that the con-
      trols require two hands for operation, but maybe this is done
      intentionally so the operator will be vigilant when moving the
      bucket, which is an act that requires vigilance (Guideline 5d).
           Molly Follette Story
North Carolina State University   Distance Education in Universal Design                               261
                           USA




                                   Principle 6. Low Physical Effort
                                   The design can be used efficiently and comfortably and with
                                   a minimum of fatigue.
                                     This means that we should minimize physical strain and
                                     overexertion. While some universal design experts in
                                     landscape architecture disagree with this Principle
                                     because it defeats the purpose of exercise, most others
                                     agree that designs should not physically overtax users.



                                  STUDENT EXAMPLE:
                                  Automatic door opener.
                                  This student chose the button used on a rather heavy glass entry
                                  door to a museum to exemplify Principle 6. The main positive
                                  attribute of this button was how it made the door easy to open for
                                  anyone who used a wheelchair or had their hands full, but he also
                                  appreciated the button’s appropriate vertical placement on the
                                  wall and good visibility. He also mentioned that the door opener
                                  mechanism employed here was less visible than the type that uses
                                  a pressure sensitive mat in front of the door for activation.

                                  The student identified two main negative aspects of this exam-
                                  ple. One was that the button was placed on a side wall too close
                                  to the adjacent doors. This made the button awkward to reach
                                  and forced wheelchair users to press the button and then rush
                                  out of the way of the door as it opened toward them. The second
                                  negative aspect was the large wheelchair symbol on the big blue
                                  button that looked unattractive and stigmatized its use.

                                  INSTRUCTOR RESPONSE:
                                  This is a good universal design being stigmatized away from
                                  use by most building visitors. I usually use power door openers
                                  just on principle whenever I encounter them. If I’m carrying
                                  anything, I feel obligated to press the button to demonstrate to
                                  anyone who happens to be watching that they could use it, too!
                                  How silly. I agree it’s that symbol that makes people think it’s
                                  not “for them.” I’ve noticed that in public places, if a powered
                                  door is offered alongside a non-powered door, almost everyone
                                  will use the powered one. However, if the powered door bears
                                  that symbol, most people will avoid using it. While this beha-
                                  vior is appropriate for parking spaces and toilet stalls, it is
                                  nonsensical in doors, so why label them? Let’s invent a non-
                                  stigmatizing icon for the button that will communicate the same
                                  thing without words.
262                         UNIVERSAL design   Part 2 North America




      In your example, if the fixed pane of glass between the door and
      the button were wider, this placement of the button on the side of
      the door recess would work just fine. However, as you point out,
      this narrow pane forces anyone who uses a wheelchair to push
      the button and then race out of the way as the door opens. This
      would be particularly awkward for someone who is left-handed,
      since the button is on the right. I expect wheelchair users who
      could do so would place themselves a safe distance away and
      reach around the corner. So, I agree with your suggestion that the
      button be placed on the front of the building where it would be
      easier to reach, as well as to see. Alternatively, the space next to
      the door should be large enough to accommodate a wheelchair
      or electric scooter... but that’s a topic for next week (Principle 7)!


        Principle 7. Size and Space for Approach
        and Use
        Appropriate size and space is provided for approach, reach,
        manipulation, and use regardless of the user’s body size,
        posture, or mobility.
          This means that we should accommodate variety in peo-
          ple’s BODY sizes and ranges of motion. This Principle
          addresses the physical space incorporated into a design
          to accommodate the user’s body and any devices or com-
          panions needed during use.



      STUDENT EXAMPLE:
      Orioles Park at Camden Yards.
      This student chose to share the now-classic example of Orioles
      Park, a baseball stadium in Baltimore, Maryland. It was desig-
      ned with input from a committee on accessibility containing
      individuals from the local community, and the stadium has a
      number of accessible features. The most remarkable accessible
      feature is the adaptable seating. About one percent (1%) of the
      seating distributed around the park is specially designed to eit-
      her serve as regular seating or be adapted. Each of these seats is
      supported on a cantilever attached to a post on one side. The
      seat can be used to support an ambulatory person or it can be
      folded up and rotated around its post out of the way to create
      space for a spectator in a wheelchair. Additional notable featu-
      res of the stadium include wide routes of travel throughout the
      facility plus accessible concession stands, condiment tables and
      ticket sales windows. The stadium provides large-print signage,
      auditory and visual announcements, and amplified headsets.
           Molly Follette Story
North Carolina State University   Distance Education in Universal Design                                     263
                           USA



                                  INSTRUCTOR RESPONSE:
                                  Camden Yards is one of our favorite examples of universal
                                  design in public architecture, too, but we didn’t have an origi-
                                  nal photo we could use in the book. Thank you for submitting it
                                  and sharing it with the class.

                                  Getting a diverse group of real potential users involved in any
                                  design project can have a significant impact on the usability and
                                  acceptability of the final results. It is critical to get users involved
                                  in the design development process as early and as often as pos-
                                  sible, and Camden Yards is a wonderful example of this approach.

                                  Weeks 15 and 16. Tying It All Together
                                  In the final two weeks of the course, the students reassemble
                                  the seven Principles of Universal Design and consider how to
                                  make a design satisfy all of them concurrently. Over the previ-
                                  ous seven weeks, the class had a chance to explore each of the
                                  Principles in turn, to see how hard it is for a design to satisfy
                                  even one Principle well. It is much more difficult for a design to
                                  satisfy all seven of the Principles of Universal Design.
                                  Designing for the needs of individuals with a specific disability
                                  is relatively straightforward; designing to address the needs of
                                  individuals with differing disabilities concurrently is much har-
                                  der; and designing for everyone is practically impossible.

                                  The assignment for Weeks 15 and 16 is to redesign an imperfect
                                  design example to be as universally usable as the students can
                                  imagine. They may choose to concentrate on a product or envi-
                                  ronment already submitted as an example of one of the Principles
                                  earlier in the semester or they may select another design altoget-
                                  her. The product or environment must be photographed, descri-
                                  bed, and then assessed against the 29 guidelines associated with
                                  the seven Principles of Universal Design. Each student must also
                                  consult with at least three other people who may include his or
                                  her user/expert from Weeks 5 and 6. Once they have gathered
                                  information, they must each redesign the example to be as uni-
                                  versally usable as possible and finally, critique their redesign
                                  solution to identify its positive and negative aspects.

                                  In the sixteenth week of the course, the instructor introduces the
                                  Universal Design Performance Measures for Products (Center
                                  for Universal Design, 2000). The Performance Measures are the
                                  result of a NIDRR-funded Field-Initiated Project to develop a
                                  means of direct assessment of products against the ideals con-
                                  tained in the Principles of Universal Design. The project was
264                         UNIVERSAL design   Part 2 North America




      conducted by the author at the Center for Universal Design in
      conjunction with subcontractor James L. Mueller of J.L.
      Mueller, Inc. in Virginia. The purpose of the Performance
      Measures was to provide a procedure for evaluating how well
      products satisfy the Principles of Universal Design and their
      guidelines. The Universal Design Performance Measures for
      Products were developed with the input of product designers,
      marketing professionals, and persons with disabilities.

      Although the Performance Measures were written to apply only
      (or primarily) to product design, it was expected that the stu-
      dents would find them helpful as they endeavored to design for
      universal usability.

      The students’ redesigns have ranged from simple (entry doors)
      to complex (entire offices). This assignment gave students the
      experience of designing for universal use but showed them how
      challenging this can be.

      Week 17. Course Wrap-Up
      In the final web page of the course, the instructor talks about
      international efforts in universal design.

      More than 20 years ago in the United States, visionaries like
      Ron Mace and Patricia Moore began to advocate for and use the
      term “universal design” to describe design that was suitable for
      any user regardless of age or ability. Some advocates of this type
      of design approach prefer to use terms like “inclusive design” to
      stress the way that designs are usable by and suitable for popu-
      lations that include individuals with disabilities and older adults
      who would otherwise be excluded. Other advocates like to use
      the term “transgenerational design” or “lifespan design” to des-
      cribe designs that are suitable for individuals of varying ages or
      by a single individual as he or she ages. Consistent with our
      belief in civil rights for all citizens, the approach in the United
      States has emphasized that designs should be usable by and sui-
      table for any individual, regardless of personal characteristics.
      This approach depends on each individual to be a self-advocate.

      It is interesting to me to note that the favored term in Europe is
      “Design For All”. In Japan, the native term is “kyo-yo-hin”, or
      shared design. In these other cultures, the emphasis is much
      more on design for everyone concurrently. These terms reflect
      different societal attitudes and stress people’s mutual responsibi-
      lity toward one another more than the rights of any one person.
           Molly Follette Story
North Carolina State University   Distance Education in Universal Design                                  265
                           USA



                                  The assignment for Week 17 is to review and comment on each
                                  other student’s redesign. The students are asked to note their
                                  observations, comment on the positive aspects of the redesign,
                                  and suggest ways to improve the universal usability of the rede-
                                  sign. The students typically provide good, constructive feedback
                                  to one another.

                                  Finally, the instructor provides her own comments on each stu-
                                  dent’s redesign effort and offers some closing remarks to end
                                  the course.

                                  Discussion
                                  This course has proven to be more successful than originally
                                  expected or hoped. While the class size has tended to be small, its
                                  composition has been rather diverse with students participating
                                  from across the United States as well as Canada. It is hoped that
                                  there will be increased international participation in the future.

                                  Because the assignments submitted by all of the students are
                                  visible not only to the instructor but to everyone else in the class,
                                  Internet courses encourage student participation. With new infor-
                                  mation presented and assignments due each week, the students
                                  must stay on schedule or get left out of the experience. Also, every
                                  student has equal exposure and an equal “voice” online. The for-
                                  mat of the course makes it difficult for one student to dominate
                                  discussions, as sometimes happens in the traditional classroom. At
                                  the same time, students are less able to “hide” in the crowd.

                                  The online medium also requires students to communicate well
                                  and concisely. They must think through what they want to say
                                  and compose their thoughts in advance, which results in more
                                  effective and efficient information transmission. In addition, the
                                  anonymity inherent in a course in which the participants will
                                  most likely never meet each other encourages them to reveal
                                  themselves (their knowledge, beliefs and fears) more honestly
                                  and fully than is typical in the traditional classroom.

                                  The major assignments in this course require each student to go
                                  out into his local community and interact with it in new ways.
                                  They must each meet someone new and critique the built envi-
                                  ronments with which they interact daily in the context of uni-
                                  versal design. This 17-week experience is likely to influence the
                                  way they perceive design and make them more demanding of
                                  design in the future.
266                         UNIVERSAL design   Part 2 North America




      The quality of the feedback given by the course instructor to the
      students in response to their assignments is highly dependent on
      the instructor’s knowledge. However, it has the potential to pro-
      vide a high level of learning personalized to each student’s effort,
      and posting all student assignments and instructor feedback on
      the course web site benefits all students enrolled in the course.

      The feedback received from the students about the course has
      been quite positive. The level of discourse online tends to be
      deep and the amount of learning taking place appears to be
      unusually high.

      Conclusion
      This course will continue to be offered once a year but additio-
      nal offerings are under development.

      The author is part of a group of universal design researchers
      that is working on a project (another Field-Initiated Project fun-
      ded by NIDRR) to develop a web site of information that will
      support universal design education for people all over the
      world. Intended for use by design faculty, students, and practi-
      cing designers, the site will contain universal design teaching
      strategies, instructional materials, project ideas, two-dimensio-
      nal images and three-dimensional virtual models, and resour-
      ces. The site will also contain links to an online journal and an
      online forum for design faculty to use to discuss with collea-
      gues issues connected with their teaching of universal design.

      While the universal design community is dedicated, we are well
      scattered around the world. It is very fitting that universal
      design be taught through the medium of the Internet in order to
      share what we know in the most efficient way with the widest
      possible audience.

      References
      Note: Internet web sites current as of March 2001

      The Center for Universal Design. Evaluating the Universal
        Design Performance Measures of Products. Raleigh, North
        Carolina: N.C. State University, The Center for Universal
        Design. 2000.
      The Center for Universal Design. The Principles of Universal
        Design, Version 2.0. Raleigh, North Carolina: N.C. State
        University, The Center for Universal Design. 1997.
           Molly Follette Story
North Carolina State University   Distance Education in Universal Design                              267
                           USA



                                  Available online:
                                     http://www.design.ncsu.edu:8120/cud/univ_design/princ_ove
                                     rview.htm
                                  Inclusion Network of Greater Cincinnati, Ohio. What is
                                     Inclusion?
                                  Available online:
                                     http://www.inclusion.org/htdocs/what_is/what_is.html
                                  LaPlante, Mitchell P., Ph.D., and Carlson, Dawn, Ph.D. Report
                                     7: Disability in the United States; Prevalence and Causes,
                                     1992. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education,
                                     National Institute on Disability and Rehabilitation Research
                                     (NIDRR). 1996. Available online:
                                     http://dsc.ucsf.edu/UCSF/pub.taf?grow=3
                                  Longmore, Paul K., Ph.D, and Piastro, Diane B.
                                     Unhandicapping Our Language. Hollywood, California:
                                     Media Office on Disability. 1988. Adaptation available online:
                                     http://www.brown.edu/Student_Services/Office_of_Student_
                                     Life/dss/DYK.html
                                  National Institute on Disability and Rehabilitation Research.
                                     NIDRR Long-Range Plan. Federal Register, Vol. 64, No. 234,
                                     pages 68576-68614. 1999. Available online:
                                     http://www.ed.gov/offices/OSERS/NIDRR/
                                  Story, Molly Follette, Mueller, James L. and Mace, Ronald L.
                                     The Universal Design File: Designing for People of All Ages
                                     and Abilities. Raleigh, North Carolina: North Carolina State
                                     University, The Center for Universal Design. 1998. Available
                                     online:
                                     http://www.design.ncsu.edu:8120/cud/pubs/center/books/ud_
                                     file/toc3b14.htm
                                  Vanderheiden, Gregg C. Universal Design Versus Assistive
                                     Technology. White paper distributed at concurrent session,
                                     “Assistive Technology or Universal Design?” at RESNA
                                     1997 conference, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. 1997.
                                  Vanderheiden, Gregg C. and Vanderheiden, Katherine R. A
                                     Brief Introduction to Disabilities. Madison, Wisconsin:
                                     University of Wisconsin, Trace Research and Development
                                     Center. 1991. Available online:
                                     http://www.trace.wisc.edu/docs/population/populat.htm
                                  Welch, Polly (ed.). Strategies for Teaching Universal Design.
                                     Boston, Massachusetts: Adaptive Environments Center. 1995.
                                  World Health Organization. Towards a Common Language for
                                     Functioning and Disablement: ICIDH –2: The International
                                     Classification of Impairments, Activities, and Participation.
                                     Geneva: author. 1998. Available online:
                                     http://www.who.int/icidh/brochure
268   UNIVERSAL design   Part 2 North America




                                                Photo: FotoKnutsen AS
          Laurie Ringaert
Universal Design Institute   Universally Designed Universal Design Course                           269
                  Canada




                             2.5 A Universally
                             Designed Universal
                             Design Course
                             Laurie Ringaert, Director, Universal Design Institute, Faculty
                             of Architecture, University of Manitoba, Canada


                             Introduction
                             The Introduction to Universal Design is a three credit elective
                             course taught at the Faculty of Architecture, University of
                             Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba, and Canada. At the time of
                             writing, this is the only course of its kind in Canada. It is unique
                             in that it includes a class made up of a variety of design dis-
                             ciplines and thus the course content is diverse. I believe it also
                             to be unique with the quantity and quality of involvement of
                             user-experts. I developed this course and have taught it every
                             fall for five years. Over the period of time I have moved, remo-
                             ved and continued to try to improve the course. I am describing
                             the course, as a “universally designed” universal design course
                             because of the manner in which I have constructed the course to
                             be inclusive of a variety of design disciplines as well as of the
                             course content and instruction methods.

                             Background on the Instructor
                             Before describing the course, I think it is important to under-
                             stand my background as the course developer, coordinator and
                             instructor. One of the first unique (universally designed) aspects
                             of this course is that I am an occupational therapist teaching in
                             the Faculty of Architecture. I do not have a design background
                             but do have extensive knowledge in universal design as the
                             Director of the Universal Design Institute located in the Faculty
                             of Architecture, University of Manitoba, Canada. The mandate
                             of the Universal Design Institute is research, education and
                             information provision on universal design. As the Director, I am
                             in charge of all projects of the Institute including developing
                             research proposals and conducting research. I thus bring the
                             research findings from the Institute to the course. I have been a
                             coordinator of a beta-test site for the testing of the World Health
                             Organization’s ICIDH and am a member of the Environmental
270                         UNIVERSAL design   Part 2 North America




      Factors Task Force. I also am a member and chair several buil-
      ding codes and standards committees in Canada and thus bring
      updates on developments in this area to the course. As Director,
      I have to keep on top of what’s happening in North America and
      in the world generally regarding universal design and again, this
      knowledge is brought to the class.

      As an occupational therapist, I bring my knowledge of human
      anatomy, disability conditions, human functioning, ergonomics,
      occupational performance, assistive technology, human deve-
      lopment from neonate to seniors and the interaction of human
      performance and the environment. I have worked in several
      areas in my career.

      I also have extensive experience with disability. My father had
      polio shortly after I was born and I therefore grew up with him
      having a disability. Through this experience I visited and became
      friends with several persons who had contracted polio and con-
      tinued to live in an Institution. I learned a great deal from them.
      In the late 1980’s and early 1990’s I spent several years as a wheel-
      chair and power scooter user due to fibromyalgia. Thus I also
      bring my own user-expert experience. As well, I am the Chair of
      the Canadian Centre on Disability Studies and in tune with the
      disability studies and the Independent Living movement inclu-
      ding knowledge of human rights issues. I have served on several
      disability-related committees including access committees.

      My Philosophy on Universal Design
      I see universal design as an evolving, emerging construct. Right
      now we are all only beginning to understand and develop the
      components. To get a complete picture of universal design, I
      believe the construct needs to include a variety of topics: uni-
      versal design theory, knowledge in human functioning and its
      relationship to universal design, knowledge of human develop-
      ment and aging, ergonomics, human rights, legal issues, disabi-
      lity studies, demographics, building codes, standards and
      guidelines, accessibility studies, design theory, disability and
      aging awareness training, understanding of user-experts critical
      involvement in the universal design of space, specific universal
      design products, universal design requirements for the range
      from indoor to outdoor and from small to large scale, research
      findings, recent trends. This list is not exclusive and there are
      more topics that others would add that I might have neglected in
      this list. In developing the course, I try to touch on all areas of
          Laurie Ringaert
Universal Design Institute   Universally Designed Universal Design Course                          271
                  Canada



                             the construct in the course. I believe that we are all students of
                             universal design; that at this time there is no one that knows all
                             the right answers. This is the way I teach the students. I see
                             myself as a facilitator to their learning: I provide them building
                             blocks and resources and they must then take them away and
                             apply them to their design work.

                             Structural Issues
                             The Faculty of Architecture is a multi-disciplinary faculty hou-
                             sing interior design, architecture, landscape architecture and
                             city planning. The Introduction to Universal Design course is
                             offered as a lecture course in the fall term. It is offered at the
                             Masters level as an elective to all students in the Faculty.
                             However, the interior design students can enter in their final
                             year of their undergraduate program since it was only recently
                             that a graduate level in interior design was offered. This is a
                             three credit elective course, which is intended to give the design
                             student an introduction to universal design concepts.

                             The student is exposed to the following topics: universal design
                             theory, disability awareness, human rights, building code
                             requirements and limitations, applications of universal design
                             with consideration of specific groups, universal design of the
                             indoor and the outdoor environment, assistive technology and
                             universal design, universal design and exhibit areas, historical
                             properties, international perspectives, products, recent research.

                             Class Composition
                             The class is open to all disciplines in the Faculty of
                             Architecture. There are usually approximately 20 students in the
                             class. Over the years the majority of students have been from
                             interior design. The next most common discipline is landscape
                             architecture. I have only had two city planning students and per-
                             haps five architecture students in total. This is the only class in
                             the Faculty where students from a variety of disciplines are
                             brought together in one class at the Masters level. When I origi-
                             nally developed the course as a new Faculty member, I had no
                             idea that this was the case. I just set up the course without kno-
                             wing current customs!

                             Course Objectives
                             The course objectives are:
                             1) To introduce the design student to the concepts of universal
                                design
272                          UNIVERSAL design   Part 2 North America




      2) To increase sensitivity of the design student to the needs of a
         wide variety of individuals
      3) To provide the student with a critical review of barrier-
         free/universal design standards/codes and guidelines
      4) To provide examples of universal design in the design process
      5) To provide the student the opportunity to explore a universal
         design topic of their own choice in more depth
      6) To provide the student the opportunity to put universal
         design principles into action in an actual design
      7) To provide the student with the knowledge of how to carry
         out a universal design site audit

      Teaching Methods
      The instructor primarily teaches this course but several guest
      speakers are brought in and may include design professionals,
      persons with disabilities, and a variety of others. The course is
      taught in the form of lectures, small group discussions, videos,
      tours and hands on experience.

      User Expert Involvement
      I have always involved user experts, (primarily persons with disabi-
      lities), in the delivery of this course. When the course first began, I
      had the privilege of having Patricia Falta visiting the Institute on
      sabbatical. She is a well-known user-expert architect who has been
      involved in accessibility/universal design issues for several deca-
      des. She co-taught several lectures with me the first two years.

      For several years I have brought in a speaker with a disability
      from our local Independent Living Resources Centre (ILRC)
      who conducts a disability awareness session. This individual
      and I usually co-teach this session. I have also brought in panels
      of persons with a variety of disabilities to discuss their needs in
      terms of the built environment. Whenever I have had these user
      experts come to the class I ensure that expenses such as tran-
      sportation costs are covered. In recent years I have been able to
      provide an honorarium of $50.00 to the ILRC speaker. This is
      important as many disabled people feel they have been exploi-
      ted by giving their expertise for free.

      In 1997, the Universal Design Institute provided an access-con-
      sulting course for six individuals with disabilities. These indivi-
      duals represented a variety of disabilities including a wheelchair
      user, two individuals who were blind, a power scooter user, and a
      person who was deaf. Part of their course requirement was to
      attend the Intro to Universal Design Course. They were thus part
          Laurie Ringaert
Universal Design Institute   Universally Designed Universal Design Course                              273
                  Canada



                             of the weekly class with the design students and exposed for
                             instance to the sign language interpreter on a weekly basis. One
                             of the intentions of the mixture was for the design students to
                             have needed direct contact with persons with differences and for
                             the access consultants to be exposed to designers. During class
                             group activities, the groups were integrated. Again the groups
                             were mixed for the class group assignment.




                             Re-design of Entrance to a daycare center. Bev Knutson, Richard Friesen
                             (access consultant student), Kori Miller, Shital Kothary.

                             Some of the access consultants continued to act as advisors and
                             design crits for this class in the subsequent years. In fact, one of
                             the access consultants became an employee of the Institute. Tanis
                             Woodland is the Administrative Assistant and also provides tech-
                             nical information at the Institute. I have included her as a lecturer
                             in a progressive number of the classes over the past two years.
                             She provides not only her own user-expert knowledge related to
                             persons with visual disabilities and wayfinding issues; she also is
                             a very knowledgeable universal design auditor and has a detailed
                             knowledge of codes and standards. A contract employee, David
                             Rapson is a city planner and a user-expert. He is the Project
                             Manager of the Institute. I have asked him to provide lectures
                             related to codes and standards as well as auditing methodologies
                             and updates on specific projects we are involved in. The presence
                             of these two user-experts, which are known experts in universal
                             design, provides the students with credibility as we speak about
                             including user-experts as part of the design process. In class they
                             discuss their role in design and delivery of projects.
274                         UNIVERSAL design   Part 2 North America




      I have always had user-experts as part of my panel of crits for
      the final assignment. I prepare an evaluation form, which is fil-
      led out by all members of the panel. I have made user-experts
      part of the final assignment on many occasions. I have structu-
      red the assignments where the students are matched up either
      with an individual or an organization that has a specific design
      problem. In most cases, these people are persons with disabili-
      ties and the students must work with the “client” to develop the
      design solution. I have also had some of the access consultants
      involved as mentors to the students during their projects.

      Experienced Based Learning
      I have always had a session where students could experience the
      use of wheelchairs, crutches, canes, being blindfolded, having
      their hearing blocked, and having their hands restricted. I have
      called this session, “Experiencing the Inaccessible Environment”
      to get away from the concept that they are experiencing a disabi-
      lity. I reinforce that they are not experiencing a disability, rather
      a difference in moving about and experiencing the environment.
      I borrow the mobility aids from the School of Medical
      Rehabilitation. At the Institute, we have a variety of glasses that
      represent various levels of visual impairment and sets of ear pro-
      tectors. I usually tape up some people’s hands with duct tape so
      that they cannot move their fingers. I also have brought in diffe-
      rent packaging in either this class or a later class, which they
      must try to open with hands in gloves, or taped up.

      To begin the session, I give then a brief introduction to the
      session and how to use the mobility aids safely. Tanis and I then
      teach them how to move about while blindfolded and also how
      to guide a non-sighted person so that they can experience both.
      I then give them a sheet with a series of tasks on it and they
      travel in small groups. For instance, they must go to the library
      across campus and take out a book. There are a number of tasks
      to ensure that they do move through a number of environments.
      They must change off and experience the various mobility aids,
      blindfolds and ear protectors. David has been involved in this
      part of the class as well. I also did this same exercise when the
      access consultants were part of the class. Those who were
      wheelchair users had to use blindfolds and those who were deaf
      had to use a wheelchair, etc. Many of the user-experts said they
      appreciated the opportunity to experience the “other side”.
      The students then return to class where they work in goups to
      fill out a form that helps them analyze the problems they
      encountered in a variety of built environment areas. We discuss
          Laurie Ringaert
Universal Design Institute   Universally Designed Universal Design Course                           275
                  Canada



                             this form along with their experience and feelings regarding the
                             exercise. Many of them comment on the apparent difference in
                             attitude they perceive from others while in a wheelchair.

                             Unfortunately I only have two hours for this exercise. I feel that
                             this exercise should be longer, but I don’t have more time in the
                             curriculum and I cannot keep the mobility devices for longer
                             than a day as the School of Medical Rehabilitation needs them
                             for their course work.

                             There are several other experience-based learning exercises that
                             I use. For instance, I have used in-class exercises that require
                             small groups to develop a universally designed restaurant and
                             another where they must design a universally designed automa-
                             ted banking machine.

                             Contact with Designers/Architects working in the
                             Field of Universal Design
                             Over the years I have brought in various designers who have
                             designed projects that have included universal design. These
                             professionals have included a landscape architect, interior
                             designer and an architect. In some cases, I have taken the stu-
                             dents to the completed project where the designer has discussed
                             the process and the work, while in other cases, the designer has
                             brought slides of their work to the class.

                             Course Content
                             The course includes a variety of topics on universal design
                             including considerations of the indoor and outdoor environ-
                             ment. I find that I may add a topic related to a particular research
                             area that I have recently worked on. Sessions are delivered in a
                             combination of lecture, small group exercise, slides and video.
                             In some sessions, we go on a tour or have a guest speaker come
                             to the class. The following are topics that I include in the
                             course. Delivery of these topics will change from year to year
                             depending upon resources, new developments or recent research
                             findings that are available.

                             Introduction to Universal Design: This provides the basic the-
                             ory of universal design. It discusses social, historical and demo-
                             graphic perspectives that have lead to the movement towards
                             universal design. There is a discussion of the World Health
                             Organization’s International Classification of Impairment
                             Disability and Handicap (ICIDH) and how the environment com-
276                        UNIVERSAL design   Part 2 North America




      ponent is related to universal design. This class also includes a
      discussion and an exercise on the seven principles of universal
      design as developed by the Center for Universal Design in North
      Carolina. These seven principles are woven here and there in sub-
      sequent classes. I have found the Universal Design Exemplars
      Slides produced by Universal Design Consultants to be very use-
      ful and I use these throughout the course. The proposed Universal
      Design Exemplar CD-ROM from the Universal Design Center in
      North Carolina will also prove to be useful in this session.

      Disability Awareness Session: This session includes a co-lectu-
      rer from the ILRC. The purpose of the session is to discuss
      myths about disability, proper etiquette and phrases to use to
      discuss any issues around disability. An excellent movie entitled
      “All Ways Welcome” is used as the basis for the discussion.
      Students are given a short “quiz” at the beginning of the session
      to help them evaluate their level of disability knowledge.

      Universal Access: A Human Rights Issue: The purpose of this
      session is to introduce human rights legislation both from
      Canada and the USA and internationally to show how universal
      design is related to human rights: how access to services, pro-
      ducts and environments is a basic human right. I have brought
      in a speaker from the provincial human rights commission who
      also happens to have a mobility disability.

      Liability and Universal Design: The purpose of this session is
      to discuss liability issues related to universal design. Recent
      court cases from the USA and Canada are discussed in this
      session. I have included a lawyer who happens to be blind and
      specializing in disability rights issues at this point.

      Universal Design and Human Functioning: The purpose of
      these sessions is to relate the functional needs of a range of
      human abilities to universal design. In this session, I show a
      video by Susan Duncan entitled: “Crossing the Line” (1999). We
      discuss how people move in the environment with differing abi-
      lities and how they use the environment to cue their movement.

      Building Codes/Standards and Guidelines: This session intro-
      duces the students to various access/barrier-free codes/standards
      and guidelines and their content and what they lack in terms of
      universal design. Students learn via lecture and a hands-on mea-
      surement exercise what the content of these is. At this point I
      demonstrate two of the Institute’s publications: Access: A Guide
          Laurie Ringaert
Universal Design Institute   Universally Designed Universal Design Course                         277
                  Canada



                             to Accessible Design for Designers, Builders, Facilty Owners
                             and Managers (2000) and ACCEX: Universal Design Expert
                             Software System (2000). The software contains many of the
                             most commonly used codes and standards in Canada and the
                             ADAAG from the USA. The software is a one-stop shop of
                             codes and standards information and also provides expert infor-
                             mation. Students can then use the software in the Institute for
                             any of their projects. I have found the ADA series videos from
                             the Center for Universal Design in Raleigh, North Carolina, to
                             be particularly useful for this lecture and for related topics. I
                             have often brought in Dr. John Frye during this lecture as he is a
                             codes expert and developer of the aforementioned software.

                             Universal Design of Public Indoor Public Spaces: In this
                             session, I try to focus on slides and materials related to indoors
                             public spaces. It includes exhibit spaces as well as information
                             on indoor products. We may go on a tour in this session. I have
                             also discussed applications to retail space in this session and
                             have introduced our recent booklet: “Is Your Business Open to
                             All?” by L. Ringaert, B. Knutson, and D. Rapson (2000) which
                             is a primer on universal design for small businesses.

                             Universal Design of Historical Properties: This session is
                             interesting as we discuss the often-difficult relationship be-
                             tween historical properties and universal design. We discuss
                             some of the basic principles behind this topic. I show a video
                             and some slides and often go on a tour of a recently renovated
                             historical site.

                             Universal Design of Outdoor Public Spaces: This session
                             includes discussion on public rights of way and outdoor recrea-
                             tion areas. We may go on a tour at this point to a local land-
                             scape architect’s recent project.

                             Universal Design and Housing: discusses universal design
                             features of single and multi-dwelling housing. Students are
                             involved in a mini-group exercise to discuss what the features
                             should be in this type of housing. Several brief videos are
                             shown and discussed. I have on occasion brought in a consumer
                             who built a custom home, have brought in Canada Mortgage
                             and Housing Corporation speakers or have visited a multi-unit
                             housing complex.

                             Conducting a Universal Design Audit: In this session we either
                             go to another site off campus or conduct an audit at the campus.
278                         UNIVERSAL design   Part 2 North America




      Off campus we have audited a local high school and a recreation
      facility. The class begins with a discussion on what should be
      included in the audit, various audit checklists, and a demonstra-
      tion of how to use measurement tools such as smart levels. I
      have used the video The Accessible Place of Business by John
      Salmon to provide an introduction to conducting an audit. The
      students are then provided with a checklist and an area and they
      must go and do a mini audit. They come back to the class and
      prepare a mini report. Tanis and David assist in this class.

      Universal Design and Assistive Technology, Automated
      Banking Machines and Products: I have handled this class
      when done in a variety of ways. For instance, I have given them
      a group exercise where they must develop a universally designed
      automated banking machine. They must consider all user groups
      to come up with the final product. I have brought in various
      speakers for this session including assistive technology vendors
      and persons with product information. I have also alternatively
      shown videos from various manufacturers and shown slides.

      Universal Design and International Perspectives: Because of
      my international travels I have taken many slides and am able to
      show some international aspects. I have also brought in spea-
      kers from the Canadian Center on Disability Studies including
      Olga Krassioukova (International Director) and Henry Enns
      (Executive Director). That Center is carrying out work interna-
      tionally and they have many interesting slides showing the level
      of accessibility internationally. The Universal Design Institute
      has also carried out a study on codes and standards internatio-
      nally (Betty Dion Enterprises Ltd. & Universal Design Institute,
      2000) and this information is discussed.

      Universal Design and Professional Issues: I have presented
      this class in some of the years. I have tried to have designers
      who have specialized in universal design in their practices. I
      also have discussed some models of practice that are emerging
      as well as the emerging market for universal design.

      Assignments and Evaluation
      I have tried to be creative with the assignments. There are two
      assignments in the course. The first is worth 40% and the
      second is worth 60% of their mark. The mid-term assignment
      involves the students picking a topic of their choice, selecting
      three articles (preferably research articles, but these are hard to
      find in this area) from a search they do in the library and then a
          Laurie Ringaert
Universal Design Institute   Universally Designed Universal Design Course                          279
                  Canada



                             critical analysis of the articles in terms of universal design and
                             in terms of two building codes/standards or guidelines. The pur-
                             pose of the assignment is many-fold:

                             A) encourages the students to do a search of library databases
                                for articles.
                             B) encourages them to do a critical analysis article.
                             C) allows them to become familiar with one topic and specific
                                aspects of building codes and standards.
                             D) provides the opportunity for the students to write a paper since
                                many of them do not write papers per se in the design school.

                             Many of the students use this as a beginning for their literature
                             review in their thesis or practicum. This assignment is due at
                             midterm and is usually a ten page double-spaced paper. I ask
                             them to provide a copy of the articles that they read and I thus
                             keep adding to the article collection at the Institute.

                             The second assignment is worth 60% and involves multi-disci-
                             plinary group work. The intent of the assignment is to match
                             the students up with a real world design problem and have them
                             develop a design. The final product is to be a drawing or series
                             of drawings and a paper. I have been lucky each year in that I
                             have had many opportunities for real world projects for the
                             students. I have had the following projects over the years: re-
                             design of a backyard garden for a wheelchair user; re-design of
                             an office common areas for a disability organization; alumni
                             house re-design of main floor and entrance; re-design of an
                             older home to allow wheelchair access into entrance; re-design
                             of front entrance to a long term care facility; re-design of the
                             Independent Living Resource Center; re-design of an entrance
                             to a daycare; re-design of a turnstile entrance for a large gro-
                             cery store; re-design of a ramp and entrance at a public market;
                             design of a pathway and accessible canoe launch for a river-
                             bank development; and development of design for a streetscape
                             for a small rural town.

                             I have always brought in a multi-disciplinary panel to assist in
                             the critical review of these projects. Typically on the final day
                             of class, the students present their work to the panel. I try to
                             include faculty members representing each of the disciplines as
                             well as persons with disabilities who are experts on universal
                             design issues. For instance, Tanis and David from the Institute
                             have been included for the past two years. I have also brought in
                             others that were trained in the access consultant course.
280                         UNIVERSAL design   Part 2 North America




      Including the faculty members on the panel is done for a num-
      ber of reasons. First, it ensures that someone with a design
      background is giving his or her opinion since I do not have that
      background. As well, it is an opportunity for me to include
      some of what appears to be the most keen of the Faculty to be
      aware of what we are doing in the hope that I can also influence
      their thinking. I have developed an evaluation form that each
      member of the panel fills out. The form consists of a rating in
      each area out of five as well as a place for comments. I aggre-
      gate all of their scores with mine to determine a mark for the
      group. I also aggregate the comments. The students receive the
      aggregation of the scores and the comments in one document.

      I will elaborate on two of the projects that were carried out.




      Downtown Winnipeg Forks Ramp Re-design. Geoff Zywina, Patricia Falta
      (architect/design crit), Shawn Houghting.
          Laurie Ringaert
Universal Design Institute   Universally Designed Universal Design Course                          281
                  Canada



                             Design for a Streetscape
                             The development of the design for a streetscape for a small rural
                             town was quite interesting. The University Industry Liaison Office
                             sent out a notice that they were looking for courses to match with
                             requests from the community for project. I sent in information on
                             the Universal Design course. It worked out that a small town in
                             Manitoba was looking for design work. The Industry Liaison
                             office matched us up. The small town paid the Office a fee, which
                             would cover any expenses, related to the project. We met in the
                             town with various community people and they expressed their
                             views on what they would like to happen. In this case the present
                             street was adjacent to an abandoned railway line which previously
                             ran through town. The townsfolk wanted to make this street more
                             vibrant and include recreation, parks, commercial areas and attract
                             tourists. Two groups of mulit-disciplinary students prepared their
                             design and programming for the space. Because of the multi-disci-
                             plinary nature of the group they were able to address planning,
                             interior design, architecture and landscape issues. Some of the
                             towns-people attended the final presentation and then the drawings
                             and written document were sent to the town. One or both of the
                             designs will be entered into a design competition at the Inclusion
                             for Design conference in Montreal, Quebec, in June 2001.

                             Walkway system and boat launch
                             Again the students met with a community organization called
                             Save Our Seine who were requesting the design. The students met
                             with the group initially to find out what their needs were. In this
                             case there was a combination of interior design and landscape
                             students working on the project. The project was well received
                             by the community group and was entered into the Universal
                             Design Conference Competition in Rhode Island in June 2000.

                             Students comment that they appreciate the opportunity to work
                             together in these multi-disciplinary groups. They comment that
                             it not only assists them in understanding the other professions,
                             the project is strengthened by a variety of in-puts.

                             Textbooks
                             I find that there are no real textbooks in universal design at this
                             time and they need to be developed. I have attempted to include
                             a variety of books as mandatory and as optional. From time to
                             time I have placed the Canadian CSA –B651 standard on the
                             mandatory list because at the time it was probably the best
                             access standard/code/guideline in Canada. The students could
282                         UNIVERSAL design   Part 2 North America




      also use this in their practice when they graduate. I have also
      tried several books as course texts over the years. These differ
      from year to year and include: the Center for Universal Design’s
      book: “The Universal Design File: Designing for People of All
      Ages and Abilities” (1998), “Universal Design: Creative
      Solutions for ADA Compliance” by Null &Cherry (1996), and
      “Beautiful Universal Design by Liebrock” (1999). I also have
      prepared notes and copies of articles into a bound copy that
      they purchase from the university bookstore. In these notes is
      an entire section on helpful universal design-related websites.

      I find that by having this as a half-year course and trying to
      cram a lot into it, I don’t have time to regularly discuss the rea-
      dings in class. I remind them to refer to the readings that
      accompany each session. Because this is an optional course, I
      find that the students are reluctant to purchase the textbooks. As
      well, they are usually at the end of their studies and ready to
      graduate and they say that they have run out of money.
      Needless to say, I have not found a good textbook solution and
      the whole textbook issue remains a dilemma for me.

      Course Evaluation
      This year I asked the students to keep a structured journal of what
      they were learning both inside and outside the class. I had set up
      a sheet of questions outlining some questions to ask them. I
      asked the students to hand in their journals twice during the term.
      I did not provide marks for handing them in. The journals were
      particularly helpful to me as they provided insight as to what was
      and what was not working in the class. Sometimes when I
      thought a class was not going particularly well, the journals sur-
      prised me in that they commented on how much they enjoyed the
      class! The journals also gave me a much broader picture of where
      they were at the beginning of class and their personnel universal
      design development over the term. This was particularly evident
      regarding interactions with persons with disabilities as well as an
      increased awareness of inaccessibility in the community. I would
      highly recommend this process. I will however, provide some sort
      of participation mark for them handing it in next year. I obviously
      will not “mark” the document. The idea is for the student to have
      the opportunity for a free flow of ideas.

      I do have some attendance difficulties particularly towards the
      end of term. This is a problem since this is such an interactive
      class and so much of it is hands-on experience. Part of the pro-
      blem is that this is an optional course and the students feel that
          Laurie Ringaert
Universal Design Institute   Universally Designed Universal Design Course                            283
                  Canada



                             assignments for required studios must take precedent. I have in
                             the past taken attendance and created a system of marks lost
                             depending upon the number of days missed. I do not like this
                             system as I feel like a sergeant major!

                             Student Evaluation of the Course
                             Each year I have the students fill out an evaluation of the course
                             over and above the usual university evaluation. My evaluation
                             form gives me more detail and relates specifically to this course.
                             Overwhelmingly the students comment that they would like to see
                             this as a compulsory course. For me another evaluation of the
                             effectiveness of the course is that I will get students who are
                             taking or who have taken the course telling me how they have had
                             to argue for other professors to allow them to include universal
                             design features in a studio project. I have also had other professors
                             comment on how a student from this class is influencing them.

                             Improvements to the Course and
                             Future Plans for Development
                             As is the way with any course that is taught, I am constantly
                             changing the methods of delivery and the topics in this course.
                             Part of this is due to various opportunities and/or new develop-
                             ments that I feel that the students should be aware of. I struggle
                             with deciding on should we go on a tour, which takes time and
                             they don’t get all the detail a three-hour lecture session would pro-
                             vide. At the same time, it is so important for the students to see
                             real projects. Unfortunately, I have had to cut back on the number
                             of tours over the years so that enough content can be included.

                             I would like to provide studio time in the class so that they
                             could work on the final project and receive on-going feedback.
                             I find that the way it works now is that they save everything till
                             the end and do a rush job on it. I would like to give the students
                             the opportunity to present what they have learned from their
                             literature review in class since they have become “mini-
                             experts” on the topic. It all boils down to needing to make this a
                             full course rather than a half course.

                             I would also like to include students from other disciplines such
                             as occupational therapy and engineering. I feel that this arran-
                             gement would be mutually beneficial to all. Regarding evalua-
                             tion, I have found that the final project being heavily weighted
                             with a 60% grade does not really provide enough separation of
                             the abilities of the students. I plan to introduce either another
284                          UNIVERSAL design   Part 2 North America




      individual assignment or a small test into the course to assist in
      providing a better indication of marks.

      I feel that this course should be compulsory and not an elective. All
      of the students should have to take it. I also feel that there should
      be universal design supplementary lectures and additions to studios
      throughout the students’ design education. In this way, the informa-
      tion can be integrated throughout their theory and practice.

      To be an even more universally designed course, it would be
      helpful to have input into the actual course design from persons
      from the community and user-experts. More could also be done
      with more resources to pay guest speakers and additional course
      developers. At this time we do not have these resources.

      Related Activities in the Faculty
      In addition to the Introduction to Universal Design course, I also
      am an advisor to six to eight thesis and practicum students who are
      incorporating universal design into their work. Most of these stu-
      dents are landscape architecture students. I have had one interior
      design student and now have a city-planning student. Two of my
      students have graduated. I am also called upon to provide the occa-
      sional guest lecture in a design professor’s class and have been
      invited on occasion to be a studio crit. This year a multi-discipli-
      nary group of us from the Faculty provided advice to a group of
      multi-disciplinary students for an aging-in-place housing design
      competition. I also provide a yearly lecture to the year-one occupa-
      tional therapy students. I have had three interior design students
      take a reading course from me and apply it to their option in aging
      elective. We have also accepted two occupational therapy and one
      city planning intern at the Institute. Their internships focus on rese-
      arch and they become research assistants during their placement.

      Conclusion
      This has been an overview of the universal design course that I
      have developed and taught over the past five years through the
      Universal Design Institute in the Faculty of Architecture,
      University of Manitoba. I have titled this chapter “a universally
      designed universal design course” because of the nature of the
      delivery, instruction, evaluation and content of the course. This
      course is taught by a variety of people including me as an occupa-
      tional therapist, persons with disabilities and a variety of guest
      speakers. Because of the multi-disciplinary nature of the students
      who take the course, a wide variety of topics in universal design
      must be covered, thereby providing a very universal design appro-
          Laurie Ringaert
Universal Design Institute   Universally Designed Universal Design Course                          285
                  Canada



                             ach to the course content. The final project comes directly from
                             the community and involves students working with stakeholders
                             to determine solutions. User-experts are involved as design crits
                             and as mentors throughout the project. The involvement of the
                             community and of user-experts is another important tennent of
                             universal design. Thus for a variety of reasons, I have universally
                             designed this course. I continue to perfect this course but acknow-
                             lege that the course has room for growth and improvement. I hope
                             that others can learn from my experiences and I look forward to
                             learning from other “students of universal design”who are develo-
                             ping curriculae in this most interesting and challenging area.

                             References
                             Betty Dion Enterprises Ltd & Universal Design Institute.
                                International Best Practices In Universal Design: A
                                Comparitive Study. Betty Dion Enterprises Ltd. Ottawa,
                                Ontario. 2000. bdion@magma.ca
                             Center for Universal Design. ADA Video Series. The Center for
                                Universal Design, North Carolina State University. Raleigh,
                                North Carolina.
                             Duncan, S. Crossing the Line: Designing for People with Disabi-
                                lities. ADAdaptations Inc. 1999. www.adaptationsinc.com.
                             Finkel, G. (Ed) Access: A Guide To Accessible Design For
                                Designers, Builders, Facility Owners And Managers.
                                Universal Design Institute, Winnipeg, Manitoba. 2000.
                             Follette-Story, M., Mueller J., Mace R. The Universal Design
                                File: Designing for People of All Ages and Abilities. Center
                                for Universal Design, Raleigh, North Carolina. NC State
                                University. (1998).
                             Frye, J & Frye, K. ACCEX: Universal Design Expert System.
                                Universal Design Institute. Winnipeg, Manitoba. 2000
                             Leibrock, C. & Evan Terry J. Beautiful Universal Design: A
                                Visual Guide. Culinary and Hospitality Industry Publications
                                Service. 1999. www.chipsbooks.com.
                             Null R. & Cherry K. Universal Design: Creative Solutions for
                                ADA Compliance. Professional Publications, Inc. Belmont
                                CA. 1996.
                             Ringaert L. & Frye K. Universal Design Resource 2000
                                Universal Design Institute. AHEAD. 2000.
                                http://www.ahead.org
                             Ringaert, L., Knutson, B., & Rapson D. Is Your Business Open To
                                All? Universal Design Institute. Winnipeg, Manitoba. 2000.
                             Salmon, J. The Accessible Place of Business Video. Universal
                                Design Consultants. www.UniversalDesign.com.
                        286




Photo: FotoKnutsen AS
     Edward S
     New York        287




Part 3
Asia and Australia
288   UNIVERSAL design   Part 3 Asia and Australia




                                                     Photo: FotoKnutsen AS
    Annette Pedersen and
 Christopher Crouch, Edith    Introducing Universal Design to a Colonial Context                    289
Cowan University, Australia




                              3.1 Introducing
                              Universal Design to a
                              Colonial Context
                              Drs Annette Pedersen and Christopher Crouch, Edith Cowan
                              University, Perth, Western Australia


                              Universal design has become of paramount importance in archi-
                              tectural teaching practice during the last decades. However, in
                              late capitalist society production is still divorced from social
                              and ethical considerations. Using design curriculum as an
                              example, the authors argue that more inclusive and responsible
                              teaching practice prepares students to realise their full potential
                              in their future careers, which might not be related to design.
                              Equally these pedagogic strategies have potential value beyond
                              teaching in the design disciplines. An inclusive curriculum, by
                              valuing diversity, and introducing the idea of ethical and
                              responsible practice is as relevant to mathematics as it is to
                              architecture or economics. The authors locate their critique of
                              modernity within Western Australian culture, engaging with
                              postcolonial theory and applying it as an emancipatory tool.

                              Introduction
                              In Western culture modernist technologies and ideology sepa-
                              rated the 19-century designer physically and socially from the
                              object s/he made. This separation of production from social use
                              prompted John Ruskin, in relating design production to wider
                              social and cultural criteria, to argue for the full cultural educa-
                              tion of the designer, rather than the technicist training s/he was
                              receiving. As the justification for much funding of design cour-
                              ses is the need to provide vocational training, the utopian edu-
                              cational project growing from Ruskin’s philosophy seems to
                              exhaust itself before it reaches the studios of contemporary
                              design instruction. More recently, legislation following human
                              rights movements around the world has raised the urgent
                              necessity for a more inclusive design process, sometimes
                              known as ‘universal design’.

                              At a post colonial conference at Notre Dame University,
                              Fremantle, Western Australia in 1993, Aboriginal writer
290                         UNIVERSAL design   Part 3 Asia and Australia




      Mudrooroo addressed his largely white audience with a bemu-
      sed query; ‘What is this thing known as ‘post colonial’? Have I
      missed something? Have all you bastards gone home?’ In rai-
      sing this issue in such an academic forum, Mudooroo high-
      lighted the quandary for Australians attempting to work within
      an ethical and socially responsible framework. Not only have
      we ‘bastards’ (sic) not left his land, but Australia is still a
      British colony. The Queen of England is also the Queen of
      Australia. Post colonialism is arguably capitalism’s contempo-
      rary face, but within this intellectual arena little account is
      taken of those who are still colonial, there is little acknowledg-
      ment of the ethical dilemmas facing continuing colonial states
      such as Australia. In this chapter the authors interrogate the ide-
      ologies of modernity that underpin both the colonising desires
      of European nations and design education and processes. Using
      examples from recent pedagogic projects in Western Australian
      universities, we argue that an inclusive education encompassing
      broad cultural and social issues produces more competent ana-
      lytical designers, and provides a critical foundation for those
      design students not following prescribed design paths.

      Such a pedagogic process also enables the introduction of uni-
      versal design across disciplines. The principles of universal
      design or access intersect with principles of inclusive curricu-
      lum, social justice and ethical practice. The negotiation of an
      ethical relationship with an ‘other’ translates across disciplines
      and levels of study. This ethical relationship is of as much
      importance to school curricula as it is to tertiary studies. While
      architects or engineers may deal with the practical aspects of
      construction design, raising awareness throughout a population
      actually militates against the forms of oppression which ultima-
      tely create disability, gender or race as defining and subjugated
      categories.

      Aims and issues
      The trial architectural design curriculum project presented in
      this chapter sought to significantly broaden design educational
      parameters. Its intention was to explore an inclusive pedagogy
      that embraced the notions of co-inquiry and collaboration, and
      acknowledged an appreciation of contemporary life experience
      and diversity. The project had the potential to significantly
      improve the education offered to students, equipping them with
      an understanding of the diversity of the community they work
      in, and skills with which to responsibly solve problems in their
    Annette Pedersen and
 Christopher Crouch, Edith    Introducing Universal Design to a Colonial Context                      291
Cowan University, Australia



                              future workplace. The focus was on the cultural and social
                              orientation of the students, consultants and teaching staff in
                              order to further a discussion regarding responsible work prac-
                              tice and ethics. The students were introduced to the concept of
                              ‘Universal Design’ and worked throughout the semester with a
                              group of community consultants each of whom had a disability.
                              Underpinning the curriculum was a constant interrogation of
                              the modernist concept of the ‘universal’, the classical legacy of
                              the ‘golden mean’, and a constructive play with modernist
                              ‘modular’ or ideal man (sic). By implication this includes not
                              only issues of gender, but also notions of the non-European
                              body, and the ways in which non-European spaces are related to
                              specific cultural contexts.

                              The trial studio was named The Universal Design Studio. The
                              Universal Design Studio did not necessarily promote the use of
                              the term itself or advance its adoption in design schools. Rather
                              students were encouraged to interrogate its ideals within the
                              framework of the history of design functionalism and aesthetic
                              outcomes, and the social responsibility of the design professio-
                              nal. However, the naming of the studio gave it a profile within
                              the school so that other students quickly realised that those
                              enrolled in the project had access to knowledge that they did
                              not. Seen somehow as experts in this field, the ‘Universal
                              Design’ students became a reference point for all the design stu-
                              dents in the school, disseminating knowledge throughout the
                              semester and into the following year. Students were not just
                              taught basic skills, but were also given handbooks and instruc-
                              tion manuals, and most importantly, the wherewithal to make
                              such technical information socially productive. The contextuali-
                              sing nature of their studies meant information was readily
                              applicable at many levels. Students who had completed the stu-
                              dio became increasingly knowledgeable in the subject area, and
                              articulate in raising these issues at all levels of their lived expe-
                              rience. (For detail of the studio curriculum see Appendix)

                              This case study, one of a number undertaken by the writers at
                              various universities, experiments with inclusive curricula for
                              the design studio. Australian university design schools have a
                              strong focus and emphasis on the development of design tech-
                              niques and the exploration of aesthetic outcomes. The central
                              aim of this trial programme was to encourage an active partici-
                              pation with a set of ‘real’ users with whom genuine relation-
                              ships could be formed. All the consultants engaged in this
                              process have physical impairments, some more obvious or
292                        UNIVERSAL design   Part 3 Asia and Australia




      visible than others. These relationships, it was hoped, would
      establish in the students a stronger sense of the complex con-
      nection between functional, socio-historical and aesthetic
      concerns by allowing the definition of the ‘user’ in the practical
      scenario of architectural design to intersect with these concerns.
      It also gave the students a sense of responsible and ethical
      practice, not always an educational concern within traditional
      design studio confines at university level.

      The project was designed to be critical, exploratory and pro-
      active to develop the unique potential that a combination of the
      creative arts, architecture and landscape architecture, has to
      offer for alternative, more inclusive pedagogic models. This is a
      significant development from the modernist design process that
      often follows a formally institutionalised procedure to solve
      design problems. The initiative develops existing strategies for
      making explicit culturally-based differences in the perception of
      form and the requirement for space and makes these an integral
      part of the design process. The project also addresses a commit-
      ment that The University of Western Australia has to inclusive
      curriculum which is ‘about curricula and teaching practices that
      by their very nature allow for student differences, be they indi-
      vidual, gender, cultural or racial or socio-economic background
      differences, which all contribute to differences in learning
      styles’ (UWA, 1996). This commitment is now endorsed by all
      Western Australian universities.

      A specific problem of the learning experience of students in
      some university design studios is the distance they are kept from
      real interaction with ‘users’. Instead, they are required to under-
      stand ‘users’ who are represented through the creative use of ima-
      ginary scenarios that operate uncritically within the dominant
      paradigms of an institutionalised ‘modernist’ design culture.
      Students are required to project onto these metaphorical scena-
      rios an understanding of the social, political and economic forces
      that define and constrain design practice outside the university
      environment. Given that most design students at Australian uni-
      versities are recent school leavers, (seventeen years of age), a
      high percentage of whom are still partially or wholly economi-
      cally dependent (upon parents, government assistance and other
      support mechanisms), much of this projection is naive.

      The Universal Design Studio project followed on from a unique
      studio project to design housing for an Aboriginal community
      in the north of the state. The student work was commissioned
    Annette Pedersen and
 Christopher Crouch, Edith    Introducing Universal Design to a Colonial Context                   293
Cowan University, Australia



                              by the Western Australian Aboriginal Housing Board. There is
                              not scope within this chapter to discuss this project (See
                              Pedersen & Revell, 1998: 1–11) but it was an important precur-
                              sor of the Universal Design Studio because those students were
                              also introduced to ‘real’ users who would eventually inhabit the
                              homes they were to design. Students were forced to acknow-
                              ledge through this project the exclusory nature of much of their
                              previous design instruction, and the way in which their previous
                              conceptualising about design initially resulted in sets of design
                              in which indigenous domestic needs were ignored. The commu-
                              nity expressed a need to have their cooking facilities on the
                              verandah, they wished to have housing that was communal,
                              they required safe shelter for women and young children and
                              separate housing for young unmarried men. In negotiating these
                              differing needs for shelter the students became aware of the role
                              that architecture has in disciplining the user.

                              The disciplined body (in the circumstances of this chapter it
                              belongs to the subject defined by difference of race or diffe-
                              rence of physical type) is a body that has to conform, despite
                              the exclusion of such a body from the benefits of mainstream
                              representation and acknowledgment. This disciplined subject
                              has little or no control over his or her environment, both physi-
                              cal and intellectual, and can best be characterised by the term
                              ‘subaltern’. The subaltern, while voiceless, is nevertheless
                              expected to be productive. Disciplinary control and the creation
                              of the productive, docile subject is specifically connected to the
                              rise of Western capitalism. This chapter is a discussion of some
                              of the implications of the divorce of production and design pro-
                              cesses from the complex realities of socio-historical and cultu-
                              ral contexts. This has occurred in the western world as a result
                              of the conflation of modernity’s interest in an undistinguishing
                              functionalism (rooted in a utopian, but ultimately exclusive,
                              idea of the universal) and capitalism’s investment in ‘forcing the
                              majority, whom it exploits, to define their own interests as nar-
                              rowly as possible’ (Berger, 1978: 154). As the modernist agenda
                              crumbles, or at least is seriously interrogated, it is timely to
                              reconsider the above concerns in relation to design pedagogy.

                              What is designing?
                              Pam Roberts, in a recent Western Australian publication,
                              Promoting Equity & Diversity – A Guide to Inclusive Language
                              & Practice in Engineering, states; ‘Engineers design and create
                              products and services for society by identifying society’s needs
294                         UNIVERSAL design   Part 3 Asia and Australia




      and providing solutions’ (Roberts, 1999: 2). This text is prima-
      rily focused on socially appropriate uses of language in the
      work environment. It is useful to concentrate on the first para-
      graph of this text and discuss it in relation to the reality of the
      Australian community in terms of cultural diversity, and to the
      design disciplines represented on our university campuses. That
      is to say, engineering, architecture, landscape architecture and
      graphic design amongst others. There are many similarities be-
      tween the disciplines of engineering, architecture and graphic
      design. These practitioners all ‘design and create products and
      services for society by identifying society’s needs and providing
      solutions’ (Roberts, 1999: 2).

      Arguably, design is an intellectual and formal problem solving
      process. However this definition avoids a pair of complex issues
      associated with design and designing: Who is it that identifies
      problems and deems them fit to be solved? Is design simply
      about the finished object, or does the object emerge from a
      complicated net of material, conceptual and cultural processes?
      One legacy of modernist design is the assumption that the
      designer, in the purest, essentialist state, is acultural and ahisto-
      rical, responding to demands for functional necessity through
      rational functional design principles (Crouch, 1990: 63–65).
      This utopian position is easily disproved by any casual glance
      about a department store. For every rational piece of functional
      design there are a hundred useless objects (probably more)
      designed with the very opposite of practical self-empowerment
      and emancipation in mind. This is something that Theodor
      Adorno pointed out sixty years ago when he referred to the cul-
      ture industry perpetually cheating its consumers of what it per-
      petually promises (Adorno, 1986: 139), but it is a concept with
      which the designing fraternity seems reluctant to acknowledge
      its complicity. Design practices are deeply rooted in ideology.
      The problem with any ideology is that its hegemonic success
      means that it becomes transparent, it is all around us but
      because it is ubiquitous we are unable to see it in operation, and
      its practices take on the quality of ‘commonsense’.

      When the design process does not result in a built or construc-
      ted object or outcome, the importance of understanding how
      ideology contextualises practice is immediately evident.
      Designing a solution may entail a prioritising of resources, of
      policy making, of allowing certain things to happen and dismis-
      sing others. For example, designing a workplace environment
      that is sympathetic to parenting needs might imply flexible wor-
    Annette Pedersen and
 Christopher Crouch, Edith    Introducing Universal Design to a Colonial Context                    295
Cowan University, Australia



                              king hours and subsidised travelling costs for workers, rather
                              than the construction of a crèche on site. To design a solution to
                              a problem involves its location within a complex of social, cul-
                              tural and aesthetic processes. Further, it is about understanding
                              the physical and ideological construction of the culture that the
                              designer serves. This chapter is itself a design, a design for an
                              inclusive pedagogic practice.

                              The Western Australian Context
                              Our writing, indeed much of the theory underpinning our peda-
                              gogic project, is informed by a contemporary field of study that
                              has been termed ‘post colonialism’. Homi Bhabha writes:
                              ‘Postcolonial criticism bears witness to the unequal and uneven
                              forces of cultural representation involved in the contest for poli-
                              tical and social authority within the modern world’ (Bhabha,
                              1994: 171). It is important to remember that within the context
                              of Australian history since 1788, (the date of British settle-
                              ment), this contest has consistently ignored the authority of the
                              indigenous population of Aboriginal peoples. Under the legal
                              ruling of terra nullius, it has functioned as if Aboriginal peoples
                              exist somehow outside the discourses of colonialism so that
                              they eventually became invisible in cultural discourse. What are
                              the ramifications for a culture struggling to come to terms with
                              its colonial past? How are the processes and objects of material
                              culture tied in with this central issue of history? A glimpse of
                              colonial Australian decorative design over the last century sees
                              a constant dialogue between designers struggling to find an
                              essential ‘Australianness’ in design and continually using
                              Aboriginal imagery in an attempt to do so. Far from remaining
                              a legal problem to be fought out in court, the legacy of the colo-
                              nial struggle between the colonising and the colonised indige-
                              nous cultures is manifest in the goods on the shelves in every
                              tourist shop in Australia.

                              Frantz Fanon writes: ‘Every human problem must be conside-
                              red from the standpoint of time. Ideally the present will always
                              contribute to the building of the future’ (Fanon, 1967: 12 –13).
                              In our discussion of inclusive curriculum and universal design,
                              in our contribution to the ‘building of the future’, we begin by
                              rooting our work in the temporal. This is achieved by situating
                              our writing within a contemporary Western Australian context,
                              with a backdrop of Australian colonial history. To speak of
                              Australian practices is in many ways misleading. Australian
                              federal political constructions, the differing histories and
296                         UNIVERSAL design   Part 3 Asia and Australia




      models of European explorations, invasion and colonial settle-
      ments, and the differing climatic and geographic conditions of
      the six Australian states creates a diverse perspective. Hence
      our location of this discussion in the particularities of our home
      state, Western Australia. Perth, the capital of Western Australia
      has a population of approximately two million people. It is the
      most geographically isolated city in the world. Add to this the
      fact that nearly 30% of the population of Western Australia are
      overseas-born and only 30% of these born in the colonial cen-
      tre, the UK, and it becomes obvious that understanding cultural
      diversity, and administering it, is of some significance to the
      state. More than 11% of Western Australians speak a language
      other than English at home, with more than 30% of the popula-
      tion in the Kimberley and Pilbara regions in the north of the
      state speaking Aboriginal languages. Because of this complex
      diversity, the state also provides translation services for over 50
      different languages (Department of Immigration &
      Multicultural Affairs, 1999).

      In the Engineering and Science Faculty at The University of
      Western Australia 22.5% of the students are women, and 10.8%
      International full-fee paying. In the School of Architecture and
      Fine Arts over 50% of the students are women, and slightly
      more than 10% International students, mainly from South-East
      Asia, but increasingly from USA and northern Europe. In terms
      of the overseas population by major countries of birth in
      Western Australia, 43% are from the UK, 8% from New
      Zealand, 5% from Italy, 4% from Malaysia, 3% from former
      Yugoslavia, 3% from India, 2% from the Netherlands, 2% from
      South Africa, 2% from Germany and 2% from Vietnam.
      Despite these figures, there is a continuing perception in
      Australia that the bulk of our migrants are from non-European
      backgrounds. This is plainly not true. However it is equally
      obvious that the Australian population is becoming increasingly
      diverse, and even were it not, globalisation demands that we are
      able to deal with diversity in a productive and equitable manner.

      Gender is as crucial an issue in Australia as elsewhere in the
      world today, and while we focus on the culturally disciplined body
      it must be acknowledged that as white middle-class academics in
      Australia, although not Australian born, our lives are easier, the
      obstacles to our personal growth via access to education, health-
      care etc, far less than the problems we would face if we were, for
      example, Aboriginal women. Our life expectancy alone is pro-
      bably thirty years longer that of an Aboriginal woman of our age,
    Annette Pedersen and
 Christopher Crouch, Edith    Introducing Universal Design to a Colonial Context                       297
Cowan University, Australia



                              our children far less likely to die in infancy, adolescence or in pri-
                              son. In Australia it is more difficult to be Aboriginal than to be
                              African or Chinese for example. While Aboriginal peoples repre-
                              sent less than 4% of total population, over 30% of the Western
                              Australian prison population is Aboriginal, infant mortality and
                              general death rates for the Aboriginal population are 4 times
                              higher than the rest of the population, and more than 35% of adult
                              Aboriginal peoples are unemployed. Aboriginal people in Western
                              Australia have only received state education since 1948 and the
                              ‘drop-out’ rate of Aboriginal students remains disproportionately
                              high. (Western Australian Advisory Committee on Reconciliation
                              (WA), 1996: passim)

                              As Australians, we tend not to be very good with issues of race.
                              The entire ‘Sorry’ debate, a populist campaign instigated to
                              extract an apology from the federal government for the excesses
                              of the past in the country’s racialised politics, and the refusal of
                              John Howard’s liberal government to co-operate in this aspect of
                              national reconciliation only highlights how inadequately the
                              Australian nation is dealing with the complex history of European
                              settlement. Even the idea that racism itself occurs is difficult to
                              accept, often the response to the suggestion that something is
                              racist is in the manner that sexism is reacted to in the example in
                              the engineering inclusivity text (Roberts, 1999: 19).

                              In the creative arts it becomes even more difficult, discouraging
                              racism or sexism can be taken as censorship. We are keen to
                              maintain freedom of speech, freedom of expression, but at
                              whose expense? For example, in western art history the nude,
                              the body of a woman, has been the accepted focus of the artistic
                              gaze for many centuries – it took the physical attack on the
                              Rokeby Venus by a Suffragette before critical attention was
                              brought to bear on this aspect of artistic practice. If drawing a
                              relationship between high art and pornography seems fanciful,
                              it is useful to remember that these forms of artistic expression
                              began their existence in private collections, hidden away for the
                              private pleasure of the lord or master. For example, the vast art
                              collection of the Pinacoteca Ambrosiana in Milan assembled by
                              the ecclesiast Federico Borromeo from 1595, also exhibits
                              small items of jewellery featuring detailed erotic images of
                              women. Time and history has bestowed upon such works the
                              sanctioning label of ‘art’ rather than ‘centrefold’.

                              Disability is socially produced, as are racism, sexism and all
                              forms of social oppression. These are all constructs, human
298                        UNIVERSAL design   Part 3 Asia and Australia




      invention. The contemporary Western Australian background to
      the universal design project we discuss in this chapter is one of
      an institutionalised racism and an institutionalised body fascism
      that is schizophrenic in its manifestations. The administration of
      cultural and economic capital in Western Australia is pluralistic
      and contradictory. For example, the Ministry for the Arts rou-
      tinely funds curatorial projects that the Minister is unhappy
      with. The Ministry funds the Perth Institute of Contemporary
      Arts which is in safe but vigorous opposition to much that the
      state government stands for. However the geographic location
      of the institute in Perth’s Cultural Centre, next to the state gal-
      lery and library, simply reiterates what Jean-François Lyotard
      foregrounds in The Postmodern Condition; that such seemingly
      oppositional moves are simply ‘programmed effects’ which ulti-
      mately have no ‘effect on the balance of power’ (Lyotard, 1989:
      16). To imagine that the Australian Federal government, its judi-
      ciary, its educational institutions and the mass media are wor-
      king within one closely defined ideology is a crude caricature,
      but the reality is that ‘subalternity and alienation have their
      roots in economic relations’ (Bahro, 1978: 378) and these insti-
      tutions are the agents by which notions of the subaltern and the
      alien are formed and perpetuated. The subaltern class is a
      non–hegemonic group or subordinate class. Not unified, the
      subaltern class is ruled by the state and their interests subordi-
      nated to that of the state. These individuals are not exploited by
      the state as are the working class in a Marxist model, rather
      they are disenfranchised and without a speaking position. In
      relation to the modern state, it can be argued that both
      Aboriginal peoples and peoples with disabilities fall into this
      category/class. It is only by an escape from the subaltern exi-
      stence that the possibility emerges for such individuals to parti-
      cipate in what Bahro calls the ‘synthesis of the historical
      process’ (Bahro 1978: 146). By this he means the construction
      of the individual not just in a legal sense – with for example the
      right to enter public buildings in a wheelchair – but also in
      terms of ethical and intellectual individuality, which ‘presses in
      turn for more productive transformation’ (Bahro, 1978: 272).

      So, while universities and major industry pursue policies of
      inclusivity driven by economic rationalism, the Australian
      Federal government refuses to acknowledge Native Title (pos-
      sibly also due to economic concerns). While the Federal
      government actively pursues policies that promote an under-
      standing of physical difference, legislating for universal access
      to government buildings and public places, the mass media
    Annette Pedersen and
 Christopher Crouch, Edith    Introducing Universal Design to a Colonial Context                      299
Cowan University, Australia



                              continues to perpetuate the role of the idealised physical stereo-
                              type in its never ending quest for liquidity. This see-sawing
                              between disciplinary action and the need to create a culturally
                              productive social docility is well documented. Michel Foucault
                              makes the point that while institutions such as prisons, hospi-
                              tals, and training institutions were/are historically part of a tech-
                              nology of discipline for working class people, it is the case that
                              cultural disciplining is a universal phenomenon that also opera-
                              tes through universities and schools (Foucault, 1987: 135–169).

                              Modernity and the concept of the
                              Universal
                              The legacy of modernity in design education in the English
                              speaking world, much of which is colonial or post colonial, at the
                              beginning of the twenty-first century is a dualistic one. On one
                              hand there is the cultural and ideological legacy of the Deutsche
                              Werkbund’s push for the standardised Typische form, with its
                              associated ideals of rationalisation, industrialisation and unitised
                              training. This aspiration to a functional universalism where
                              design and its physical and conceptual processes are reduced to
                              the acultural and ahistorical acquisition of skills is in opposition
                              to an educational model which contextualises the design process
                              within cultural and social frameworks. This alternative, which
                              argues for plurality and difference, is best characterised by Doll’s
                              metaphorical ‘dancing curriculum, where the steps are patterned
                              but unique’ and which is located in a world of complex and con-
                              tradictory social realities (Doll, 1993: passim).

                              Despite its decline in prestige in academic circles over the last
                              twenty years, the cultural context that Western Australians work
                              within is that of modernity (and continuing colonialism). It is
                              ironic that new movement towards inclusivity in design should
                              adopt that old modernist term ‘universal’, and this irony was
                              fully explored in our exampled design curriculum project. The
                              cultural and ideological struggle in the first third of the last cen-
                              tury saw many attempts to create universalist systems in art and
                              design that echoed the previous century’s attempts to create
                              universalist systems of thought and communication. This univer-
                              salising project was flawed from the start because of its Euro-
                              centric origins. Esperanto is a good example of this. On one
                              hand, Esperanto was a laudable project which attempted to erode
                              cultural difference and exclusivity by the production of an artifi-
                              cial language which communicated across cultural difference.
                              Its universality however, is confined within the paradigms of
300                        UNIVERSAL design   Part 3 Asia and Australia




      European language structures, its vowel sounds are European, its
      alphabet is European, its cases European. Antonio Gramsci was
      never happy with Esperanto arguing that it suppressed the diffe-
      rences in power reflected in the contested use of colonised and
      colonising languages, it created an ambience of cultural compe-
      tency rather than cultural literacy that facilitated an understan-
      ding of cultures that could only ever operate at the most
      superficial of levels, forever avoiding the deep cultural antago-
      nisms that made such a language necessary in the first place (1).

      Language is the vital element in any cultural exchange, Frantz
      Fanon at the very beginning of the first chapter of Black Skin,
      White Masks, focuses on the importance of language stating;
      ‘For it is implicit that to speak is to speak absolutely for the
      other’ (Fanon, 1967: 17). Marxist philosopher V. N. Volosinov
      discussing the relationship of the class struggle to language
      writes; ‘Sign becomes an arena of the class struggle’ (Volosinov
      quoted in Moi, 1985: 157). This is language rooted in history,
      politics and cultural endeavour, not ahistorical and acultural
      Esperanto. Modernist design with its emphasis upon the ‘ratio-
      nal’ and ‘functional’ can be viewed in much the same way as
      Esperanto. The need for a design that was egalitarian, that was
      pragmatic and useful began a necessary process in the levelling
      of what had been oppressive cultural and economic differences
      (Crouch, 1999: 46–71)

      In the process of creating what modernist designers saw as an
      ‘acultural’ and ‘ahistorical’ design form that subsumed cultural
      variation, an intrinsic refusal to acknowledge difference could
      only lead to an oppressive form of design. By this we mean a
      design culture based around a formalised and idealised concep-
      tion of the functioning European body. This formalised concep-
      tion was both physical and cultural, where the industrialised
      culture of the European worker was to determine how the con-
      structed environment was to be conceptualised and built.
      Modernist universalism created an abstracted (disciplined)
      body, docile and productive, which operated within a set of
      functional paradigms that once withdrawn from its original cul-
      tural context becomes disempowering rather than emancipatory.

      A critique of modernity’s rationalism is not a critique of the role
      of reason, and the role of reasoning in design, or of the utopian
      aspiration to a universality and transparency of cultural activity.
      Rather it is a critique of the way in which a historical form of
      rationality has become redundant, and often oppressive. While
    Annette Pedersen and
 Christopher Crouch, Edith    Introducing Universal Design to a Colonial Context                     301
Cowan University, Australia



                              momentarily emancipatory for European culture, the ‘rationa-
                              lity’ of modernist culture requires interrogation and criticism to
                              make it relevant to new conditions. To paraphrase Foucault; the
                              rationality of the abominable – rationalising the atrocities of the
                              Gulf War, or the bombing of Serbians civilians by NATO planes
                              for example – is a fact of contemporary history. This does not
                              give irrationality any special qualities however. At the core of
                              contemporary moves towards ‘Universal Design’ are the succes-
                              ses and failures of the last attempts, and the dialectic between
                              the two positions needs constant acknowledgment for ‘functio-
                              nalism’ to have value as a design tool.

                              Design Thinking
                              Traditionally in the western world design is a teleological, crea-
                              tive, problem-solving process leading to a constructed or built
                              solution (Booth, 1983: 283). The teaching of design takes place
                              in a studio, rather than a lecture theatre. The design process
                              itself typically includes a ‘series of sequential steps from pro-
                              ject acceptance, design, construction drawings, implementation,
                              post-construction evaluation and maintenance’ (Booth, 1983:
                              283). This basic model is used by graphic designers, interior
                              designers, landscape architects, architects, industrial designers,
                              engineers and scientists to solve problems. Within this tradition
                              design is taught as a linear process dealing with solving one
                              specific problem, each student working alone on their indivi-
                              dual problem (Booth, 1983: 283). In addition to such a process
                              an important aspect of design education is the ability of the stu-
                              dent to locate a learnt specialism within complex and contradic-
                              tory social realities, to be aware of the limiting qualities of that
                              specialisation as well as its benefits. Further to this self-awa-
                              reness is the need to contextualise design practice within cultu-
                              ral systems, and by so doing critique those systems.

                              Not only the context but also the methods of delivery of models
                              of education can militate against such a self-reflexive process.
                              In our own teaching experience we have found that teaching
                              students to become self-reflexive is an extraordinarily difficult
                              objective to achieve. At the Western Australian School of Visual
                              Arts, Edith Cowan University in Perth, students are encouraged
                              to use this concept as a core principle to locate themselves in
                              the complex of cultural structures in which they operate. To
                              ‘locate’ a student must perceive his or her emotional, aesthetic
                              and intellectual life and how it is constructed, for good and bad,
                              by education, life experience, the organisation of society and
                              the systems and functions of its institutions. An initial attempt
302                        UNIVERSAL design   Part 3 Asia and Australia




      to promote this analytical attitude was the imposition upon the
      students of a ‘self-reflexive journal’. However this became a
      site for introverted musings rather than a tool for critical
      thought and analytical debate. It became clear that students did
      not know enough about their immediate cultural environment to
      make the project worthwhile without enormous prescriptive
      input by tutors that defeated the object of the initial exercise.

      Another unsuccessful attempt to encourage students to become
      self-aware was a graphic design project in which students were
      asked to ‘frame’ themselves visually according to their cultural
      origins. Most were unable to invest the brief with any real criti-
      cal qualities and produced images that whilst visually success-
      ful were touristic, and lacked any indication of understanding
      the complexities of this piece of self-ethnography. The most
      direct way of achieving any form of self-reflexivity in young
      students in our experience, has been to provide them with ‘real’
      experience, and to take them outside of themselves. That is to
      say, provide a curriculum where as part of their design course
      they engage with real users over an extended period, and in
      which their subjectivites are forced to become articulated
      through outside agencies. By so doing students need to take
      responsibility for their work beyond the narrow confines of aca-
      demic achievement. It also requires students to learn to listen to
      individuals they may not regard as having the same authority as
      their university lecturers, or possibly themselves. It is this pro-
      cess of learning to work collaboratively in a community envi-
      ronment that provokes self-awareness. We note however, that
      such courses are often extremely difficult to organise in times
      of limited resources and the pragmatics of timetabling in the
      new economically driven universities.

      As we have previously mentioned, the form and content of
      design teaching are intimately linked. Also there is a measu-
      rable, as well as a linguistic difference between training and
      education (Buss, 1995: passim). The problems inherent in the
      legacy of modernist industrialised training and competency
      based learning, were spelled out clearly by Bowden and
      Masters. Graduates emerging from technicist and poorly con-
      ceived unitised learning environments;

        lack the ability to communicate ideas and to discuss and
        debate issues; are unable to relate, communicate and interact
        with others from different backgrounds and experience and
        are deficient in their ability to conceptualise projects from
    Annette Pedersen and
 Christopher Crouch, Edith    Introducing Universal Design to a Colonial Context                      303
Cowan University, Australia



                                broad goals through to ultimate evaluation (Bowden and
                                Masters, 1993: 173).

                              This is a problem when even potential employers, often cast as
                              the villains of the piece in demanding specialised training to fit
                              industry requirements, are not interested in such limited gradu-
                              ates. A recent report by the British Centre for Research into
                              Quality, on the careers of British art and design graduates,
                              observed that the qualities and attributes sought by employers
                              are; ‘initiative, creativity, independent judgement, oral commu-
                              nication skills, flexibility and adaptability, analysis, critique and
                              synthesis’. Such qualities were often developed by autodidactic
                              students; ‘in spite of, rather than because of the course as often
                              students were left to develop these for themselves with little or
                              no help or guidance from within their programme of study’
                              (Harvey and Blackwell, 1999: 4).

                              The spectre of specialisation in education, the legacy of moder-
                              nist technocratic rationalism so ably characterised by Jürgen
                              Habermas, raises its head here, but we don’t need to be
                              Habermas to spot this problem (Habermas, 1974, 1984: pas-
                              sim). In an article published by the Australian Graphic Design
                              Association, How To Get a Job, Lam Po Tang observes; ‘At
                              design school, the subjects you study are organised around
                              areas of technical expertise. Out there, in the world of practi-
                              sing designers and studios, the work follows areas of applica-
                              tion of design skills’ (Lam Po Tang, 2000). The transmissive
                              educational model of specialist teaching, technicist and uniti-
                              sed, economical when applied to large teaching groups, is incre-
                              asingly problematic in preparation for the design industry (2). It
                              also runs counter to the ideas about creativity and productive
                              thinking which (should) lie at the heart of design education. A
                              joint research project between British Nuclear Fuels Limited
                              and the Royal College of Art in London observed that the big-
                              gest creative constraint for the specialist was stepping outside
                              the paradigms of what s/he personally knew was technically
                              feasible and entering into a metaphorical world (Joyce,
                              Franklin, Neal, Kyffin and Veronies, 1999: passim).

                              This world of metaphor is not an escape from design solutions,
                              but an entry point, where analogy helps to define physical and
                              cultural problems. The student equipped with these skills is not
                              only increasingly likely to succeed within his/her chosen field
                              of design, but also, and more importantly, move sideways into
                              other areas of cultural endeavour. Schön observes; ‘At its best,
304                         UNIVERSAL design   Part 3 Asia and Australia




      the architectural studio is an exemplar of education for artistry
      and problem-solving, architectural studios are prototypes of
      individual and collective learning-by-doing under the guidance
      and criticism of master practitioners’ (Schön, 1985: 6) (our
      emphasis). Herein lurks a fatal flaw, for while within this trans-
      missive model there is space for metaphor, that in itself is not
      enough, because the problem lies in a disconnection from his-
      tory, culture and subjectivity that occurs with the modernist
      functional universalising of traditional design practice. Again,
      to refer to the Universal Design Studio, one of the first exerci-
      ses given to the students was to ‘map’ their impaired consul-
      tants’ bodies and create designs from this knowledge working
      critically with the concept of the golden mean, to critically
      interrogate the dominant paradigms of physical proportion until
      they had conceived an ‘amodular’ body. One of the students
      designed a complicated system from her consultant’s body and
      then abstracted these drawings into beautiful small abstract
      paintings. Surely a very pleasing aesthetic metaphor, but enti-
      rely meaningless. However, having established a metaphorical
      subjective entry point into the issues at stake, later in the semes-
      ter, more confident with her understanding of the issues of not
      only impairment but a whole range of social and historical
      issues, the student produced award-winning designs for a hypo-
      thetical Universal Design Access conference.

      Conclusion
      A recent international conference at Curtin University in Perth,
      Re-inventing Design Education in the University highlights the
      wealth of contemporary debates around university design peda-
      gogy. It is clear that the role of metaphor as a creative tool is
      rising in ascendancy in reaction to economically driven compe-
      tency based training schemes and their conceptual limits.
      However these debates are not exactly new, The Journal of
      Architectural Education has documented an on-going discus-
      sion around issues related to design education since its incep-
      tion in 1949. What is increasingly imperative in the authors’
      point of view is the social and ethical obligations of the desig-
      ner. Dutton’s Cultural Politics and Education introduces a jour-
      nal issue devoted to the theme of his article. He notes that not
      only should we understand education in consciously political
      terms, but also that education itself – the investigation of know-
      ledge, the curriculum, the social, cultural, and gender relations,
      the teaching practices – tends to reproduce dominant ideologies
      and so serve the hegemonic status quo (Dutton, 1991: 69). He
    Annette Pedersen and
 Christopher Crouch, Edith    Introducing Universal Design to a Colonial Context                    305
Cowan University, Australia



                              comments further that ‘thinking of architectural education in
                              this way is woefully undertheorized by architectural educators.
                              Work in this area is almost non-existent’ (Dutton, 1991: 69).
                              Our work falls into this educational investigative category.

                              More recently than Dutton, Groat challenges the profession to
                              ‘reassess architecture’s pedagogic conventions and the definiti-
                              onal scope of the field’ (Groat, 1996: 166–183). Her paper con-
                              tends that ‘diversity may mean survival for the field’ in a
                              professional world known for what Dixon’s article, A White
                              Gentleman’s Profession? describes as ‘its lack of diversity’
                              (Groat, 1996: 166–183). While some in educational institutions
                              are addressing the issues of cultural context, of diversity and
                              inclusivity, it would appear there is still a long way to go, and
                              that linking inclusivity, diversity, pedagogy and design itself is
                              virtually unknown. Indeed, at the recent Curtin University con-
                              ference the authors were the only participants who linked these
                              within a philosophical and socio-historical context (Crouch &
                              Pedersen, 1999: 173–179).

                              Gramsci’s ideas about the institutionalised intellectual can help
                              to redefine pedagogical and design structures. Gramsci stressed
                              the importance of the intellectual not as an institutionalised
                              administrator or scholar, but as part of a wider, moral commu-
                              nity. As he argues, the new mode of intellectual life:

                                can no longer consist in eloquence, which is an exterior and
                                momentary mover of feelings and passions, but in active par-
                                ticipation in practical life, as constructor, organiser, ‘perma-
                                nent persuader’, and not just a simple orator. (Gramsci,
                                1997: 344)

                              In such a model, the role of the Master, or the specialist, is con-
                              stantly under scrutiny as the paradigms of, in our case design
                              culture, are questioned in practice. There will always be institu-
                              tional structures that provide armatures for institutional and
                              institutionalised study. Under a Gramscian model however they
                              cease to be external forces which limit and are limited, but can
                              be transformed into a means of freedom, instruments to create
                              new ethical and political forms and a source of new initiatives
                              (Gramsci, 1997: 244 & 359–369).

                              The International Journal of Inclusive Education promotes con-
                              temporary discussions surrounding inclusivity and social jus-
                              tice. For example, McCarthy, Dolby and Valdivia argue issues
306                         UNIVERSAL design   Part 3 Asia and Australia




      of identity and multiculturalism are far more complex than the
      simple or easy opposition of the West to multiculturalism
      (McCarthy, Dolby and Valdivia, 1997: 89–100). As they argue,
      it is the specific and local nature of identity that post colonia-
      lism acknowledges. While these writers go no further than dis-
      cussing this in relation to literature in their article, this chapter
      deals with these issues in relation to studio practice and design
      action (3). Indeed we are able to go much further than this, for
      it is in the application of theory to practice that we are able to
      enter into what Gayatri Spivak terms a ‘responsibility structure’
      with the subaltern, thus enabling a learning which flows both
      ways. That is to say, between teachers and students, between
      disabled persons and intellectuals, between the academic world
      and the subaltern (Spivak, 1996: 293).

      It is in this learning process that the rich core of our project is
      revealed with its extensive emancipatory potential. In the
      modern world formal history is the history of the state, there is
      no history of the subaltern. As Antonio Gramsci reminds us,
      such a history can only ever be a monograph (Gramsci, 1997:
      52). In Australia there is a history that exists before and outside
      the history of the modern state; the oral histories of Aboriginal
      peoples whose Dreamtime stories predate formal European his-
      tory. For the contemporary Australian state these histories have
      no legal authority. In the modernist design world the amodular
      body, the disabled body, the racialised body, are all subalterns.
      These bodies fall outside knowledge, they do not speak.
      Gramsci proposes an active role for the intellectual, those
      whom he refers to as, ‘organic intellectuals’ (Gramsci, 1997: 4).
      That is to say the intellectual has a role of conscious responsibi-
      lity to provide a link between the ruling class, the working clas-
      ses, and what we would term the ‘disenfranchised’ (or subaltern
      in the post colonial world). For us as academics it is our respon-
      sibility to provide a space to critique the constraints of moder-
      nity in such a way that fractures occur. Thus our work may
      enable moments in which those who have been unable to speak
      in modernist [design] discourse, the impaired or the racialised,
      are inserted into the circuit of academic and ultimately, design
      work. This means for the design disciplines that rather than spe-
      cialised texts on design being published and exclusionary buil-
      dings erected, an understanding of diversity across culture, race
      and physical type is built into any design considerations from
      the inception of the process.

      Bhabha discusses the ‘move away from the singularities of
    Annette Pedersen and
 Christopher Crouch, Edith    Introducing Universal Design to a Colonial Context                     307
Cowan University, Australia



                              ‘class’ or ‘gender’ as primary conceptual and organizational
                              categories’, which he sees as having resulted in the awareness
                              of a variety of subject positions currently informing ideas of
                              identity. He argues that it is in the negotiation of the range of
                              subject positions in contemporary cultures, from the ‘periphery’
                              or boundary to authorised rule, that dominant discourses in
                              western culture can be challenged (Bhabha, 1994: 1). One can
                              argue that design studios have traditionally been taught within a
                              modernist paradigm in which the studio ‘master’ occupies the
                              privileged subject position, the position of authority, and the
                              student is deprived of active subjectivity. Post colonial dis-
                              course, on the other hand, provides a theoretical position from
                              which each subject may speak. Modernity revisited through
                              post colonial discourse provides a space for what Bhabha terms
                              ‘enunciation’. In this way design itself can be interrogated and
                              translated in order to value difference. The use of post colonial
                              theory in a colonial context is of course fraught with problems.
                              Nonetheless, such a curriculum exploring the dialectic relati-
                              onship between the theory, the colonial reality of Australian
                              society and practice, and between political and social can lay
                              the foundations for a truly emancipatory subjectivity.

                              One of the key issues of post colonial theory has become that of
                              identity and the space, or site, of difference. Within this space is
                              a play of private and public, past and present, the physiological,
                              psychological and the social. Post colonial theory put to prac-
                              tice within a modernist paradigm has the potential to disrupt the
                              binary oppositions of such a discourse. Within the traditional
                              model of the design studio, within the framework of the modern
                              design aesthetic, post colonial theory’s enunciative potential can
                              play havoc with exclusionary and oppressive practice. Post
                              colonial theory can provide a translation service between
                              modernity’s limiting binaries and boundaries and more contem-
                              porary notions of difference. This can be clearly seen in the trial
                              Universal Design Studio. Working in this instance within a
                              modernist design institution/discourse/paradigm, the students
                              called into active question those principals. Furthermore they
                              quested beyond those modernist boundaries, through exercises
                              of self-reflexivity, metaphor and collaboration, to reach for,
                              investigate and make visible within this particular institution,
                              the profoundly silent subaltern figures that predate the history
                              of modernity. In addressing inclusivity both in terms of tea-
                              ching strategies and then design itself, this trial project actively
                              explores ways in which we can transform our sense of what it
                              means as an Australian, ‘to live, to be, in other times and diffe-
308                        UNIVERSAL design   Part 3 Asia and Australia




      rent spaces both human and historical’ (Bhabha, 1994: 256).
      In interrogating the idea of ‘universal’ within an inclusive curri-
      culum, the students ultimately ruptured modernist design para-
      digms. In exploring and mapping a geography of disability as a
      metaphor for the social, the studio unpacked some of the totalita-
      rian effects of the modernity’s desire for the ‘universal’. The
      abnormal body, the disabled body, is traditionally oppressed
      within institutional confines, those repressive regimes of the
      modern world which construct an individual’s identity. In allo-
      wing space for a play of different subjectivities the students
      found that disability is both a socially and historically relative
      identity that is produced by society. The modernist ideal of the
      universal is based on a narrow understanding of the ‘able body’.
      That is to say, there is a presumption that individual subjects can
      be reduced to identical units. We need look no further than le
      Corbusier. Under institutionalised economic rationalism, differ-
      ence is socialised as social oppression. Thus for these design
      students direct engagement embracing multiple political con-
      cerns became an emancipatory process. And for us as academics?
      Putting ourselves on the line by contesting privileged knowledges
      in order to empower our students in the margins of academia
      simply reinforced yet again the idea that knowledge is power.

      End notes
      (1) To be culturally literate is an entirely different thing from
      being culturally competent. It can be seen as the difference be-
      tween being a passive consumer of culture and being a producer
      of culture, the difference between a cynical appropriation of
      ideas, and the sophisitcated use of them in furthering the pro-
      cesses of communication.

      (2) A Tale of Two Studios published by the Australian Graphic
      Design Association, measures the creative successes of two
      British design studios. Pentagram, which has a transmissive
      management model, allocating specialist tasks to teams is no-
      where near as successful as Wolff Olins that employs a horizon-
      tal, rhisomic model. This has the potential to have profound
      implications for design education.
      http://www.agda.asn.au/dr/Edu/ISS/TaleofTwoStudios.html
      19.10.2000

      (3) There are twenty-two schools of architecture in Australasia.
      Some institutions such as Curtin University, combine architec-
      ture, construction and planning; others, such as Deakin
    Annette Pedersen and
 Christopher Crouch, Edith    Introducing Universal Design to a Colonial Context                 309
Cowan University, Australia



                              University, combine art and architecture; while others combine
                              architecture and building, as does Papua New Guinea
                              University of Technology. The School of Architecture and Fine
                              Arts at UWA is unique among Australian universities in hou-
                              sing three studio-based disciplines; architecture, landscape
                              architecture and fine arts. Thus the UWA school provided an
                              ideal site to trial innovative pedagogic practices related to
                              design disciplines. The Universal Design trial studio took place
                              in 1999. (See Appendix)


                              Bibliography
                              Adorno, T. & Horkheimer, M. Dialectic of Enlightenment
                                Verso, London. 1986
                              Bahro R. The Alternative in Eastern Europe, NLB, London.
                                1978
                              Berger, J. Ways of Seeing, Penguin Books, London. 1978
                              Bhabha, H. The Location of Culture, Routledge, New York.
                                1994
                              Booth, N. Basic Elements of Landscape Architectural Design,
                                Elsevier, New
                              York. 1983
                              Bowden and Masters. Implications for Higher Education of a
                              Competency-Based Approach to Education and Training,
                                DEET, Canberra. 1993
                              Buss, D. The Impact of Modularity on Art and Design in Higher
                              Education, University of Plymouth Press, Exeter. 1995
                              Crouch, C. Why teach design history? In Thistlewood, D. (ed)
                                Issues in Design Education, Longmans, London. 1990
                              Crouch, C. Modernism in art, design and architecture, St
                                Martins Press, New York. 1999
                              Crouch, C. & Pedersen, A. in Swann, C. & Young, E. (Editors)
                                Re-inventing Design Education in the University Conference
                                Proceedings, School of Design, Curtin University, Bentley.
                                2000
                              Department of Immigration and Multicultural Affairs.
                                Population Flows Immigration Aspects, Canberra. 1999
                              Doll, W. A post-modern perspective on Curriculum, Teachers
                                College Press, New York. 1993
                              Dutton, T. Cultural Politics and Education, in, Journal of
                                Architectural Education, M I T Press, Washington, Vol 44,
                                No 2. 1991
                              Fanon, F. Black Skin White Masks, (translated by Charles Lam
                                Markmann) Grove Press, New York. 1967
310                       UNIVERSAL design   Part 3 Asia and Australia




      Foucault, M. Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison,
        Random House, New York. 1979
      Forgacs, D. & Nowell-Smith, G. Selections from cultural
        writings / Antonio Gramsci. Harvard University Press,
        Cambridge, Mass. 1985
      Goetz-Schierle, G. The Pedagogy of Architectural Technology,
        in Journal of Architectural Education, M I T Press,
        Washington, Vol 51, No 2. 1997
      Gramsci, A. Selections from the Prison Notebooks of Antonio
        Gramsci. (Ed. Quintin Hoare & Geoffrey Nowell-Smith),
        Lawrence & Wishart, London. 1997
      Groat, L. Reconceptualizing Architectural Education For a
        More Diverse Future: Perceptions and Visions of
        Architectural Students, in Journalof Architectural Education,
        M I T Press, Washington, Vol 49. No 3. 1996
      Habermas J. Dogmatism, reason and decision, in Theory and
        Practice, London. 1974
      Habermas J. Modernity: an incomplete project in Foster H. (ed)
        Postmodern Culture, London, Pluto Press. 1984
      Harvey and Blackwell Destination and Reflections: Careers of
        British Art, Craft and Design Graduates, Birmingham, UCE
        Press. 1999
      Joyce, Franklin, Neal, Kyffin and Veroneis. What Stimulates the
        Creative Process in The Journal of Design and Technology
        Education, Volume 3, number 2. 1999
      Lam-Po-Tang
        http://www.agda.asn.au/dr/Edu/HowToGetAJobPart1.html.
        2000
      Landry, D. & MacLean, G. (Ed) Selected Works of Gayatri
        Chakravorty Spivak, Routledge, New York. 1996
      McCarthy, C, Dolby, N.,& Valdivia, A. N. The uses of culture:
        canon formation, postcolonial literature and the multicultu-
        ral project, in The International Journal of Inclusive
        Education, Vol 1, No 1. 1997
      Moi, T. Sexual/Textual Politics, Routledge, New York. 1985
      Pedersen, A. & Revell, G. Design in Derby – Teaching for
        Diversity in Arts on the Edge Conference Proceedings, Edith
        Cowan University, Mt Lawley. 1998
      Roberts, P. Promoting Equity & Diversity – A Guide to
        Inclusive Language & Practice in Engineering, National
        Women in Engineering Committee, Barton. 1999
      Schön, D. The Design Studio, RIBA Publications Limited,
        London. 1985
      University of Western Australia. Inclusive Curriculum,
        Discussion Paper. 1996
    Annette Pedersen and
 Christopher Crouch, Edith    Introducing Universal Design to a Colonial Context                   311
Cowan University, Australia



                              Western Australian Advisory Committee on Reconciliation.
                                Western Australia’s Other History, Council for Aboriginal
                                Reconciliation, Midland. 1996

                              Appendix
                              The 1999 Universal Design Studio was a funded Equity Project
                              conceived by Annette Pedersen in The School of Architecture
                              and Fine Arts at The University of Western Australia. The
                              course curriculum was designed by occupational therapist Jaye
                              Johnson, architect Romesh Goonewardene and Annette
                              Pedersen. The curriculum had to satisfy course requirements,
                              provide the students with enough information to give them an
                              understanding of recent public access legislation, the mechani-
                              cal requirements and physical limitations of a variety of disabi-
                              lities and also address a commitment to inclusive curriculum.
                              This meant a substantial departure from the usual studio pro-
                              gramme and a shift in emphasis from studio teaching staff to
                              the students themselves.

                              The equity funding was used to employ six consultants to work
                              with students in the design studio for the thirteen-week semes-
                              ter. Each of these consultants had a disability. Design studios at
                              UWA usually have six contact teaching hours each week. The
                              contact hours in this studio were extended to nine to include a
                              three-hour life drawing class each week. The life models used
                              in this class were selected to compliment the studio focus on
                              ‘amodular’ bodies. That is to say, rather than being artists’
                              models they were, for example, extremely aged, heavily preg-
                              nant or disabled people. The consultants were invited to join the
                              students in these drawing sessions.

                              The teaching programme commenced with an intense one-day
                              seminar to introduce Universal Design to the School. All staff
                              and students were invited to attend. An information package
                              was presented followed by a video documentary of Universal
                              Design. Following this the audience were introduced to the con-
                              sultants. Dividing the audience into groups, each consultant
                              then accompanied them on a tour of the School and its grounds.
                              Each group had to document the accessibility of the School and
                              report back to the studio staff. The idea of the seminar was to
                              introduce Universal Design to everyone in the School and to
                              encourage all the students to begin to think about access in both
                              real and design terms.
312                        UNIVERSAL design   Part 3 Asia and Australia




      The first studio design exercise required the students to work in
      small groups with their consultants to document various imagi-
      nary access scenarios to the University. For example, one group
      had to document their consultant as an international student
      attending the university for the first time to enrol. For this
      group, as their consultant was in a wheelchair, the difficulties of
      simple things such as negotiating showers in the student accom-
      modation, crossing the road and finding a suitable toilet on
      campus, proved highly enlightening. This exercise took three
      weeks. The students had to co-ordinate their work with their
      consultant without any assistance from teaching staff. At the
      conclusion they were to design and publish an ‘Access
      Information Package’ for the campus Equity Office.

      The second exercise was to map an ‘amodular’ body. This exer-
      cise presumed a relationship of trust between the students and
      their consultants. The students were required to map their con-
      sultants’ bodies and movements and use them for a design. One
      of the students ‘mapped’ her consultant’s irregular movement
      up and down a staircase and used the information to compose a
      musical score. The time allocated to this exercise was two
      weeks. At this point in the semester an informal jury was orga-
      nised to provide valuable critical feedback for the students. The
      jury included the studio consultants and representatives from
      the Equity Office, the Student Guild and the State Disability
      Services Commission.

      The third exercise required the students to design a folly within
      an existing university building, Winthrop Hall. The folly was
      for an international Universal Design Conference and Fair and
      had to allow access for all members of the public. As the buil-
      ding was constructed nearly one hundred years ago before any
      thought of access had occurred to the architect, this provided a
      real challenge. The students were provided with extensive plans
      of the building in which to locate their designs and were
      required to produce a range of detailed drawings and scale
      models. Three weeks were allowed for this third brief.

      The final studio brief was to design a chemistry laboratory and
      chemistry faculty building allowing universal access. As the
      university was in the process of constructing a new chemistry
      building, the students were able to utilise the range of data
      already assembled for the university architects. Having their
      consultants on hand to tour existing laboratory facilities high-
      lighted a range of access issues that even the architects had not
    Annette Pedersen and
 Christopher Crouch, Edith    Introducing Universal Design to a Colonial Context                    313
Cowan University, Australia



                              considered. Again the students had three weeks in which to
                              complete their design work.

                              A bibliography of readings selected to complement the studio
                              course was pinned up in the studio and students were expected
                              to complete weekly readings which were then discussed in stu-
                              dio. Although all the students were architecture students, the
                              studio staff were interdisciplinary. That is to say; architects, an
                              artist and an art historian, with a range of other specialists
                              bought in for studio sessions throughout the course. At the end
                              of the semester a Universal Design Feedback Forum was orga-
                              nised for the students and their consultants. This was co-ordina-
                              ted by the Student Guild. The School usually organises Student
                              Perception of Teaching tests at the completion of semester.
                              However it was believed that while SPOT tests are useful they
                              do not allow for community feedback which was important in
                              this case. Furthermore it was important to both debrief all the
                              participants in this project and to document their experiences
                              for future work.
314   UNIVERSAL design   Part 3 Asia and Australia




                                                     Photo: FotoKnutsen AS
      Singanapalli Balaram
National Institute of Design   Universal Design Education and Development                             315
                       India




                               3.2 Universal Design
                               Education and
                               Development
                               Prof. Singanapalli Balaram, M.Des. (NID); Fellow (SIDI),
                               National Institute of Design, Paldi, Ahmedabad, India


                               Introduction
                               The concept of Universal Design is widely understood today as
                               “an approach to creating environments and products that people
                               of all ages and abilities are able to use to the largest extent pos-
                               sible”. Though this approach is often most beneficial to older
                               people and people with disabilities, universal design benefits
                               every one to some degree. In many parts of the world Universal
                               design is attracting increasing attention. However, in the part of
                               the world, which we call the “Developing world”, designers are
                               required to grapple with so many other pressing issues that
                               Universal Design finds little attention in their professional prac-
                               tice. As a consequence Universal Design Education also finds
                               little space in the curriculum of design schools there. Ironically
                               it is in this part of the world that the majority of the world’s
                               population with disabilities lives; and that the elderly popula-
                               tion is rapidly increasing. Fortunately, significant work is being
                               done at design institutions by students and faculty members
                               making Universal Design Education as an option available and
                               as an activity sponsored by National or International voluntary
                               bodies. This article is based on the author’s experience and
                               observations of such complimentary type of Design Education.

                               The Significance of Universal Design
                               Education
                               Education is not a mere imparting of knowledge and skills
                               necessary for one to earn a living. It is also to broaden one’s
                               horizons. Education is not a mere give and take. It is shaping
                               the whole mind-set of the future generation. The dominant trend
                               in all futuristic thinking is this: more equality, more non-discri-
                               mination and more freedom. Universal Design is all this and
                               thus Universal Design Education is better education for the
                               world.
316                        UNIVERSAL design   Part 3 Asia and Australia




      In the past there used to be special schools, colleges and
      Universities for women. Today such need has become largely
      redundant. Co-education is preferred and considered “progres-
      sive” because any action that brings the discrimination down
      and equality up is progressive. If progress is measured by how a
      Nation takes care of its weaker subjects, then Universal Design
      Education certainly is progressive. Recognition of Universal
      Design Education as “Progressive” Education is an important
      step. Only then, will Universal Design Education be perceived
      positively and accepted universally by all educators and educa-
      tional institutions. It is necessary to remove the present stumb-
      ling block where universal design is looked upon as an act of
      Social Service. This patronising attitude cripples the spirit of
      universality.

      Limitations of the Developing World
      The developing world, which is a majority in terms of the num-
      ber of people, has typical characteristics quite different from the
      economically developed world. These characteristics have bea-
      ring on the kind and method of Universal Design Education
      required in those countries.

      These characteristics are:
      1. Population Pressures
      Developing world populations are large and they usually put
      enormous pressure on the resources available in a country. This
      leads to scarcity of resources and scarcity of facilities, and the
      competition constantly increases.

      2. Illiteracy
      In countries like India a major percentage of the population is
      illiterate. This has bearing on the kind of media needed for
      communication and the role of education in the country. There
      is still prevalence of oral culture where the printed word has
      limited influence. Even visual literacy is low.

      3. Unemployment
      As the population is larger than the work available, particularly
      aggravated by the increasingly labour saving machines and
      mass production, the employment available in a developing
      country is getting less and less. This is leading to large-scale
      migration and brain drain on one hand and increase of poverty
      on the other.
      Singanapalli Balaram
National Institute of Design   Universal Design Education and Development                            317
                       India



                               4. Lack of Capital and infrastructures
                               In developing economies, most of the nation’s capital is utilised
                               towards such basic needs as food, health, primary education,
                               law and order, defence, railways, irrigation etc. Very little capi-
                               tal is thus available for developmental activities like higher edu-
                               cation, industrial development, research in science and
                               technology and commercial investment. Lack of capital also
                               leads to lack of infrastructure. Design also gets low priority in
                               such countries.


                               Pre-requisites for Universal Design
                               Education in Design Curriculum in the
                               developing world
                               There are some aspects, which are essential pre-requisites for
                               making new changes in the curriculum and for the inclusion of
                               Universal Design Education in a sustainable and effective way.
                               These are more crucial in developing economies where popu-
                               lation pressures and rate of unemployment are very high.

                               These aspects are:
                               a) Career opportunities
                               Career opportunity is a key motivator in students opting to
                               study a particular course. When Universal Design would offer a
                               future where economically rewarding jobs and occupations are
                               available in the society/industry, the students would opt for
                               Universal Design Education.

                               b) Government Policies
                               Policy directives and laws by the governments are some sure
                               ways of including Universal Design component in all schools
                               and universities nationwide. Such policies should not be merely
                               made in the parliament but should be executed effectively by
                               the local management. There should be legal enforcement and
                               penalties for schools that do not follow the policy. There should
                               also be incentives such as tax rebates as well as scholarships
                               and special grants for schools that do follow the policies.

                               c) Interest groups
                               People with disabilities (PWD), people with lesser abilities
                               (PWLA) and senior citizens (SC) are a minority today. But
                               demographic studies show that these groups are increasing in
                               developing countries and may in he future make up such large
                               numbers that their interests cannot be marginalised. These
318                        UNIVERSAL design   Part 3 Asia and Australia




      groups should form associations and organisations to press for
      their interests to be attended in the education system nation-
      wide. This is already taking place in many developing countries
      including India.

      d) Public Awareness
      Finally and most importantly, there should be a general public
      awareness towards Universal Design Education and its impor-
      tance to society. Such awareness brings acceptance of Universal
      Design Education by society at large. It will have very signifi-
      cant impact in the developing world where parents and elders
      still continue to play a dominating role in deciding their ward’s
      education.

      Universal Design Education in the
      developing World: The institutions
      In the above context, the way universal design is approached in
      the developing world could be shown through an example of the
      National Institute of Design in India. The approach adopted at
      other Indian design institutions is similar.

      According to rough estimates (as census are not available)
      India’s population with disabilities is a staggering 50 million. If
      we add to this the growing elderly population and the growing
      population of the less able, the figures become amazingly vast.
      In spite of this magnanimity of scale, there is no legal binding
      by any organisation towards this marginalised population. No
      design institution in the country offers courses or
      degree/diploma specialisation in Universal Design; in a recog-
      nised way. But fortunately several activities in this area are
      happening, with the sole initiation of individual designers and
      design teachers. The methods adopted successfully to sustain
      design and design studies in Universal Design are significant
      and would be focus of this article.

      The National Institute of Design (NID) is an autonomous non-
      profit organisation under the government of India. The purpose
      of this organisation is to support the industries in India with
      design training, design service and research. These industries in
      India are diverse and include large-scale industries as well as
      vast small-scale industry sector; craft production and home
      based cottage production. As an institution of national impor-
      tance, the NID’s priorities are expressed in its “Internal organi-
      sation, structure and culture” document as below:
      Singanapalli Balaram
National Institute of Design   Universal Design Education and Development                              319
                       India



                                 “NID’s concern is the quality of the physical environment
                                 and its relevance to human needs. The task is educational-
                                 professional education of designer and education in the
                                 wider context, through service to industry and the communi-
                                 cation links established to provoke informed and sober public
                                 discussion. The endeavour is not only to respond to existing
                                 demands with discrimination and without preconceptions but
                                 to create an awareness of problems of contemporary signifi-
                                 cance that are as yet generally unrecognised. Its challenge is
                                 responsible pace-setting.”

                               NID is small in size with its existing strength of about 280
                               students and 48 faculty members. It provides comprehensive
                               Education in Design, offering ten specialisations in different
                               areas of Design. These specialisations include Product design,
                               Furniture design, Ceramic design, Textile design, Apparel
                               design, Graphic design, Video programmes, Animation design,
                               Exhibition design and New Media. It is the only design institu-
                               tion in the country having such a variety of design disciplines
                               under one roof.

                               The programme at NID has two entry levels: one programme of
                               four years’ duration is for the school leavers; the other, the advan-
                               ced entry programme of two and a half years’ duration is for gra-
                               duates of architecture, engineering and fine and applied arts.

                               The overall structure of NID’s programme is a combination of
                               theory, skills, design projects, and field experience. Sponsored
                               design projects are brought into the classroom to provide pro-
                               fessional experience. Complimentary studies in Science and
                               Liberal Arts widen the students’ horizons and increase general
                               awareness of contemporary issues. Students are involved with
                               real-life projects through NID’s Design Service wing and spon-
                               sored classroom projects. Thus one learns by doing. This expo-
                               sure ensures that they leave NID as young professionals,
                               experienced in actual service. Academic evaluation at NID is a
                               system of constant performance review, founded on professio-
                               nal standards and individual potential, rather than on a system
                               of marks and examinations.

                               There is a common programme called Foundation Programme
                               for one year, after which the students branch out into various
                               disciplines of their choice. However, the education is genera-
                               lised, and common courses such as Science and Liberal Arts,
                               History of Design, Ergonomics and Design Management
320                         UNIVERSAL design   Part 3 Asia and Australia




      continue to take place. In the Second year students also take up
      an Open Elective course which is offered across the disciplines.
      A mix of students from different disciplines opt for their prefer-
      red topic offered as Open Elective. The programmes are conclu-
      ded with a six-month diploma project conducted in the field,
      usually sponsored by Industry or a non-Governmental or
      Governmental Organisation. Evaluation is done through work
      presentation to an expert jury.

      Methods of Universal Design
      Education: Its management and
      teaching
      As mentioned earlier, there is no specialisation offered, nor a
      department established, nor a curriculum devised to include
      Universal Design in a structured way. There is also no policy
      direction for the institution to start Universal Design teaching
      or practicing or researching. Yet – the NID has been able to sus-
      tain Universal Design activities and win a National award for
      creation of barrier free Environment and for its attention to the
      needs of the disabled people in December 2000. How is this
      achieved?

      Faculty Motivation
      The institution employs design teachers who have strong social
      values and firm national commitment. In their professional
      design practice, these faculty members take up assignments
      related to disability, elderly issues and other subjects in the uni-
      versal design field. When there are no clients to commission
      design jobs in this area, these faculty members work on self-
      sponsored projects in the area. Thus these teachers have become
      role models for the students and young designers to follow.

      Career possibilities
      In countries where the economy is poor, most of the young stu-
      dents tend to choose an education that can provide them with
      well paying careers in future. It is thus necessary to regularly
      inform them of the career opportunities in the Universal Design
      area. These jobs may not be able to give higher pay when com-
      pared to other commercial careers, but these jobs may provide
      social recognition, honour and personal fulfilment along with a
      reasonable pay. The incentive is not in cash but in kind. The
      campus placement wing plays a great role in explaining this
      fact and influencing the young minds towards Universal Design
      as an important and meaningful option.
      Singanapalli Balaram
National Institute of Design   Universal Design Education and Development                            321
                       India



                               Exposure and awareness: A Course
                               In the present design education, the institute aims at flexibility
                               and generalisation. In such education, the skill courses are
                               specific but the project courses are open. The choice of subject
                               to be taken as project course is left to the individual student. As
                               Universal Design is an emerging area of knowledge, it needs to
                               be sufficiently exposed to the students at an early stage at the
                               institution. This will positively influence their choice of
                               Universal Design subjects as projects. At NID Foundation year
                               offers an important course titled “Environmental Exposure”.
                               This course aims to expose the student to the present realities.
                               Special needs are one such reality. It is a field based, experien-
                               tial type course. The students go out of the campus, stay with a
                               village community and experience their way of life, thus deve-
                               loping an understanding of the people and their way of living.
                               This course creates wonders in moulding the student’s attitudes
                               and in developing value towards Universal Design. Besides
                               bringing the future designers face to face with the user, it
                               encourages open minded thinking so necessary for creative
                               solutions.

                               Design concepts and concerns: A course
                               Important among the core design courses being taught at Indian
                               design institutions is the course pertaining to Design process.
                               The course title has changed a few times but it is an essential
                               course, which teaches the student the structured method or vari-
                               ous methods of designing. Design method is the heart of
                               Design. Today the scope of this course is broadened to include
                               not only the methodology but also the concepts, concerns and
                               values that form an integral part of the methodology. The
                               course format involves discussions, surveys, and interviews of
                               people, design thinkers and professionals. This course is also
                               offered in the first year of the graduate and postgraduate pro-
                               gramme.

                               Universal Design is an increasingly important design concern.
                               The students are introduced to the area of Universal Design and
                               the design opportunities that are available in that area. This
                               method proved very effective in influencing students in taking
                               up projects and thesis in the area of Universal Design in the
                               advance years of Design learning. Courses such as Design
                               concepts and concerns establish firmly the relationship and
                               relevance of Universal Design to the design profession.
322                           UNIVERSAL design   Part 3 Asia and Australia




      User involvement




      A group of visually impaired people testing a product designed for them
      and interacting with the designer.



      The institute maintains a constant rapport with various local
      organisations dealing with disability and extensively involves
      experts dealing with disability and people with disabilities in
      design learning in a number of ways. Such people are used as
      resource persons, providing information on a given problem or
      as co-guides in instructing a student in a project related to spe-
      cial needs. They are most valuable in evaluating a design solu-
      tion and also giving feedback after using a new design in
      prototype form over an optimum period. The NID has close
      collaboration with local institutions such as Blind people’s
      Association and B M Institute of Mental health. There is an
      important advantage in such involvement of disabled individu-
      als and their organisations. Their presence in design institutions,
      which otherwise are often fashionable and elitist, has positive
      effects on the Design community. The design students going to
      these organisations with project work find themselves in the
      midst of people with disabilities and gain an experience which
      makes a lasting impact on the young minds. Such experiences
      spread in the campus and inspire other students to choose
      Universal Design Education.
      Singanapalli Balaram
National Institute of Design   Universal Design Education and Development                                   323
                       India



                               Electives




                               Open elective course. A wallet designed for use by both visually impaired
                               and non-impaired people. The brightly coloured and differently textured
                               strips are so placed inside the wallet that the blind person can recognise
                               the value of a currency note by tracing it along with these strips.



                               In India design institutions such as NID recognize the need for
                               flexibility in the design education because of the nation’s neces-
                               sity for a vast variety of design services. Most Design schools
                               therefore have Elective courses as important components in the
                               curriculum. These are offered both as departmental electives
                               pertaining to specific area of design and also as open electives
                               which any design student irrespective of his specialisation or
                               department can opt for learning. Universal Design is one of the
                               electives, which is being offered. The elective is made more
                               interesting by using the experiential format. The student adopts
                               a person with the specific disability he is working on. The off-
                               campus experience, the newness of learning and the challenges
                               it offers to designers – all these aspects make the student
                               learner fascinated with Universal Design. The design solutions
                               of such elective courses are made into prototypes and given to
                               people with disabilities for test-use and a feedback session is
                               held. After this, the better solutions are taken for production
                               either at the NID workshops or at the collaborating institutions
                               dealing with disabilities. Both the designer, the therapist and
                               the user are involved in the creation as well as realisation of the
                               design.
324                           UNIVERSAL design   Part 3 Asia and Australia




      Diploma/degree project




      Toys for mentally handicapped children – a diploma project. These toys
      could be used by the non-retarded children as well and be enjoyable.
      Student: Gayatri Menon.




      At a design university the diploma/degree project is the final
      project which qualifies the student for the award of degree or
      diploma. At some architectural and design schools it is given as
      thesis submission, but at the National Institute of Design, it is
      given in the form of a project lasting six months and more. The
      topic for the project is chosen by the student in consultation
      with the teachers and the department concerned. This is an
      opportunity for influencing students to take up projects or thesis
      related to Universal Design.
      Singanapalli Balaram
National Institute of Design   Universal Design Education and Development                            325
                       India



                               The importance of this method is twofold. Firstly, due to ade-
                               quate time available, the project allows the students to explore
                               the topic or problem thoroughly and create an implementable
                               and practical solution. Many a time, the design solution is sub-
                               mitted in the form of a working prototype, which could be
                               tested. Secondly, a diploma or degree project is sponsored by an
                               industry or organisation which has a long term interest in the
                               project. In the context of poor economics, the funds made avai-
                               lable by the sponsor are crucial for the high quality of work.
                               More important than funds is the fact that the industry or orga-
                               nisation is likely to implement the project. As we are aware, the
                               ultimate aim of design is not merely a brilliant creative solution.
                               The ultimate aim of design is a product or communication or an
                               environment or a system that reaches the people for whom it is
                               designed and which improves the quality of life around.

                               Universal Design Education for non-designers
                               Good ideas don’t confine themselves to any professional speci-
                               alisation although some professions such as Arts, Architecture
                               and Design are popularly considered creative. However, the fact
                               is that all human beings are creative. It is common experience
                               that many non-designers do get great break-through ideas but
                               often these ideas die prematurely as these were not developed
                               further and taken to conclusion. In special areas such as disabi-
                               lity, old age and less ability, the users (the disabled and the
                               elderly) and people dealing with these users such as therapists,
                               nurses, family members and voluntary workers are particularly
                               most knowledgeable. They often come up with innovative and
                               amazingly beautiful solutions. Such individuals will be very
                               useful for the cause of Universal Design if they were given
                               design training. The National Institute of Design plans to start
                               M.Phil. or Ph.D. level programmes for such non-designers.
                               Such programmes need to be tailor-made based on the candida-
                               te’s background, educational qualifications and experience.
                               Since the programme is offered to people who are already wor-
                               king, the learning format needs to be flexible. It is guidance
                               based and uses computer technology for distance education.

                               Promotion
                               Universal Design Education needs to be promoted actively in
                               developing economics where there is increasing pressure on
                               limited finances. Without such promotion Universal Design
                               Education will have a danger of being marginalised. Promotion
                               is done in the following three ways at the National Institute of
                               Design:
326                         UNIVERSAL design   Part 3 Asia and Australia




      Recognition through awards
      Apart from encouraging students to participate in competitions
      in the field of Universal Design, the institute also channels
      external private funds, fellowships etc towards universal design.

      Mass Communication
      Projects in the field of Universal Design are published widely
      through local media –
      newspapers, magazines and television.

      Intellectual Activity:
      Seminars and workshops are organised from time to time to
      keep the focus of faculty and students on Universal Design.
      Such an activity also helps bring external experts in this area
      close to the institute and interact with the faculty and students.

      Creation of Positive Climate
      It is necessary to establish, on campus, a positive climate in
      which Universal Design Education will grow. One of the instru-
      ments of establishing such a conducive climate is the physical
      environment. The institutional campus itself is made barrier
      free and efforts are constantly made to improve the access fur-
      ther. Old structures are modified to become barrier free and
      Universal Design is carefully considered while planning new
      structures. The other important instrument is the appointment of
      staff/faculty with special needs and admission of students with
      special needs. Disability should not be an impediment to the
      opportunity to learn or to work. It may mean special effort and
      establishment of special machines and special facilities but that
      is worthwhile. In developing countries, this expense can be met
      through approaching industrial houses and international organi-
      sations for sponsorship of equipment and facilities. The co-
      habitation and co-education of able and disabled students
      together is an important step in removing the mental barriers.

      Content of Courses
      Cultural contexts
      Universal Design is the need of the present times, but this
      should not be confused with Design in one cultural, economic
      and physical context being suitable in any other and different
      context: It certainly will not be suitable because the contexts are
      crucial determinants of the design solution and its relevance.
      This is a basic principle to observe while working out contents
      for Universal Design and special needs courses. One major
      Singanapalli Balaram
National Institute of Design   Universal Design Education and Development                            327
                       India



                               example is the design of wheelchairs, which brings access to
                               the lower limb disabled, sick or the elderly. However, wheel-
                               chairs are of no use in countries like India where the major
                               population is rural and performs all household work at ground
                               level. Besides, in all the rural areas there is severe lack of out-
                               door paved surfaces on paths and roads. Even the ground inside
                               the house is mostly unpaved and indoor spaces are too small to
                               allow easy manoeuvring of the wheelchair. A team of design
                               students from NID and Queens University (Canada) worked on
                               this problem and designed a Ground Level Assistive Device for
                               India (GADI) which is a suitable Indian design alternative for a
                               wheelchair. The design also takes into account the local materi-
                               als, village skills and low expenses. This product is presently
                               being manufactured by the local “Blind People’s Association”
                               and is found to be extremely useful in the wake of the
                               Earthquake disaster which struck Gujarat in January 2001. The
                               “GADI” can be used for a variety of needs by others including
                               as play material for children. It could be used by anybody in
                               any situation which requires a slight elevation from the ground.




                               Ground level Assistive Device for India (GADI) – An international
                               collaborative student project.
328                         UNIVERSAL design   Part 3 Asia and Australia




      The Importance of Challenge
      Young people thrive on challenges. Designing an assistive
      device for persons with disabilities is a laudable intention and
      good social act but not a challenge to design. In a market either
      with non-existent or with prohibitively expensive ugly devices
      for the disabled, even a mediocre design can win laurels. If the
      young students were to take to Universal Design, there should
      be challenges. A good solution for a disabled person is a good
      solution for everybody. Designers should see to it. If the lift
      switch is located so that it can be reached by a wheelchair user,
      an abled person can also reach it. The car Ford Focus takes care
      of elderly and thus takes care of the young too. The challenge
      therefore is to design devices or communication that are crea-
      tive solutions relevant to both abled and the disabled; rich in
      aesthetic value and highly competitive in a commercial market
      when placed next to other products. All other aspects being
      equal, universality is our added value and the edge over other
      designs.


      Approaches to Universal Design
      Universal Design as addressing diversity rather
      than patronage
      People with special needs should be recognised as special
      people: Speciality is diversity and is not to be treated as some-
      thing that is missing. This requires an attitudinal correction. Or
      else there is danger that any difference or diversity could be
      labelled as less-ability. History tells us the glaring example of
      how Jews were considered inferior to others. In countries like
      India girls are still considered inferior to boys. These discrimi-
      nations will perpetuate unchecked unless the sane world resists
      them now. A democratic way is to look at a difference only as a
      diversity without making any comparative judgement. Diversity
      is a value in itself. It enables diverse abilities to co-exist with-
      out prejudice and delivers help to whoever need it without
      patronising but as a sense of duty by other responsible social
      beings.

      Attitudinal Changes Required
      The core of Universal Design attitude is the acceptance of the
      fact that every human being is less able in one way or another
      (a matter of degree) and at one time or another (a matter of
      time). Even young, healthy people can grow old or become
      pregnant and can thus experience lessened abilities.
      Alternatively situations and environments can also cause
      Singanapalli Balaram
National Institute of Design   Universal Design Education and Development                           329
                       India



                               limitations on a healthy, young person’s abilities. Noisy envi-
                               ronments can impair hearing and dim lighting can limit vision.

                               The research project for the elderly at the Royal College of Art,
                               London, is very appropriately “ named Designing for our future
                               selves” to highlight this aspect. At NID a Post diploma pro-
                               gramme was announced in 1998 as “Design for the less abled”
                               to include all kinds of limitations. The attitudinal shift that
                               needs to be inculcated in the young learner is that Universal
                               Design is not designing for “them” out there. It is designing for
                               “ourselves’” in a comprehensive way, to include all people
                               possible, for all times possible. In a somewhat exaggerated way
                               it is “Design for all and for all times”.

                               Traditional value base
                               Developing societies are often also less literate societies.
                               Education for these societies should be viewed broadly and
                               not confined narrowly only to literacy. Confining to literacy
                               would mean excluding the majority population from our
                               concern.

                               Fortunately, many developing countries are tradition bound.
                               These traditions often have admirable social and familial
                               norms, which are essential to promoting positive attitudes
                               towards people with special needs. The important aspect to note
                               is that these traditional norms are so deeply rooted that they are
                               still holding in this new millennium in spite of modernisation
                               and technological progress. In Indian society, for example,
                               respect to elders is important. The elderly are consulted when
                               important decisions are made, and are given prominent place in
                               religious rituals and social events. Compassion towards the poor
                               is promoted through Hindu religious concepts such as “Daridra
                               Narayana” – which means God lives in the poor (so you must
                               serve them) and “Atithi Devo Bhavah”, which means the guest
                               is like a divine opportunity (so you must feed him).

                               While many religions portray God as omnipotent having a
                               physically perfect form, some of the gods in India’s Hindu
                               religion are less perfect, and therefore more like humans. Hindu
                               religion has “Bala Krishna” – God as child, with all childish
                               vulnerabilities and “vamana” – God as dwarf. Some of the
                               traditional games in India are also worth mentioning here.
                               These games indirectly develop the child’s compassion towards
                               the disabled and the less able. Such games are the “Blind fold
                               game” and the one legged game. These games will have the
330                        UNIVERSAL design   Part 3 Asia and Australia




      same effect as the simulation exercise used in Universal Design
      Education: without actually naming them so.

      In traditional societies, which are most prevalent in the develo-
      ping world, traditional social and family structures are dominant
      even now. Decisions about young people’s education are made
      by the parents or other elders in the family. In the past in the
      joint family, any person in the family with special needs is auto-
      matically cared for by others. He or she is accepted and facilita-
      ted as normally as a child is accepted and facilitated in a home.
      People With Disabilities are treated not with pity or a patroni-
      sing attitude but with an attitude which recognises the individu-
      al’s special needs. They are given work appropriate to their
      special abilities. Inculcation of such a value base is necessary in
      the school/college education where Universal Design Education
      is being given.

      Conclusion
      While the scale and magnitude of the demographic situation of
      the people with lesser abilities (the disabled elderly and the
      weak) is amazingly vast in India and other developing coun-
      tries, there are traditions in these countries which have inherent
      Universal Design principles. Under the constant pressure of
      modern living; new technologies and increasing urbanisation,
      many of these traditions are now threatened with extinction.
      The present need is to prevent such extinction and redefine
      these traditions to address the contemporary contexts.

      Man always looks at new developments and new technology
      with curious suspicion. This suspicion is more prevalent in the
      poor and the disadvantaged. There is no denying the fact that
      the fruits of most new developments and technology reach first
      the people who are already in the front and this obviously incre-
      ases the gap between the developed and the developing, and
      between the abled and the disabled. Realising this fact and
      applying new technology such as information technology for
      Universal Design is essential in developing countries. Let it be
      emphasised that the new technology is new opportunity and
      hope for better as well. One would see such applications all
      over India.

      People are also thinking minds. More people also mean more
      mind power. As there is increasing number of problems, the
      number of solutions is also increasing. In India, a number of
      Singanapalli Balaram
National Institute of Design   Universal Design Education and Development                           331
                       India



                               innovative technical and design solutions relevant to the
                               people’s needs here have originated from the people themselves.
                               These solutions also take into account appropriate materials and
                               appropriate production methods. Furthermore there are thera-
                               pists, nurses and social workers full of knowledge and wisdom
                               who act as a springboard for innovative design solutions.

                               In view of the above factors, the essential considerations for
                               developing Universal Design courses in developing countries,
                               ought to be as below:

                               a) Upholding and re-articulating the traditional principles of
                                  Universal Design to meet the changing needs of the society.
                                  This provides a value base and an attitude essential for
                                  Universal Design Learning.

                               b) Surveying and documenting the various design solutions crea-
                                  ted and successfully applied by different people at different
                                  locations in the country. The authors of such solutions may
                                  not be trained designers and solutions may need design sup-
                                  port in refining and developing. But such solutions rooted
                                  well in the problem contexts are excellent educational and
                                  inspirational tools.

                               c) Design is not an isolated activity but a team effort. A contin-
                                  uous dialogue and collaboration with people in the field is
                                  crucial in developing course content as well as in sustainable
                                  monitoring and course correction as we go along.

                               d) Design teachers must actively pursue the application of new
                                  materials and new technologies in creating new universal
                                  design solutions. This could be done as a classroom project
                                  or a commissioned professional project. One such classroom
                                  project is “Mandala”, carried out by the design students at
                                  the NID. The project is to find means of reintegrating senior
                                  citizens into the community. The solution is usable by
                                  anybody. It uses the advanced technology of Apple compu-
                                  ters. Another project presently in the planning stage by the
                                  author is the use of the modern material Titanium for
                                  Universal Design solution.

                               The future holds the prospect of Universal Design Education at
                               many design schools in India because there is an increasing
                               demand from the people. The National Institute of Design will
                               soon be starting a regular Post-graduate and other advanced
332                         UNIVERSAL design   Part 3 Asia and Australia




      level programmes in the area of Design for special needs, and
      Universal Design will be part of these programmes. In future
      the Institute plans to establish a centre for special needs with
      Universal Design at its core. This centre will not only support
      education at the institute but also Universal design activity in
      the country by developing Universal Design standards, codes
      for barrier-free environment; research through fellowships,
      reference materials; policy guide lines for government etc. Such
      a centre will not only be a resource for other design institutions
      in the developing world but also be a model to be adopted.

      The key challenge faced by the world today is globalisation.
      Technological changes have revolutionised communications and
      brought people face to face. But people are diverse since their
      places, climate, and cultures, religious beliefs and roots are dif-
      ferent. In my personal opinion and perhaps an exaggerated sim-
      plification, disability is only a difference from ability. At least it
      needs to be seen that way. Our tolerance to difference of any
      kind – be it another religion, another skin colour, another coun-
      try or another need – will be the most important step towards
      world peace and harmony.
      Singanapalli Balaram
National Institute of Design   Universal Design Education and Development                    333
                       India



                               References
                               Balaram S. Design for Special needs. New Delhi,
                                 Encyclopedia Britannica – Asia edition. 1999.
                               Kose, Satoshi (ed) Universal design conference papers
                                 Tsukuba, Building Research Institute. 1999.
                               Ranjan A: Balaram S (Eds.) Young designers 2000. Ahmedabad,
                                 National Institute of Design, 2000.
                               Sarabhai, Gautam. NID: Internal Organisation, Structure and
                                 Culture. Ahmedabad, National Institute of Design.1969.
334   UNIVERSAL design   Part 3 Asia and Australia




                                                     Photo: FotoKnutsen AS
  James D. Harrison
 and Kenneth Parker    Tertiary Education and Promotion in Asia                             335
Singapore University




                       3.3 Universal Design:
                       Tertiary Education and
                       Promotion in Asia
                       Prof. James D. Harrison and Kenneth Parker, Singapore
                       University


                       1. Tertiary Universal Design Education in
                       Singapore

                       Introduction
                       There exists some published work on the education of Universal
                       Design, Accessibility and Mobility topics and it is not the inten-
                       tion to examine these topics. But, in order to effect change – to
                       promote the development of a truly non-handicapping built
                       environment for the widest spectrum of users, there is a pres-
                       sing need to heighten awareness.

                       Raised awareness can lead to a greater involvement with issues,
                       and from this follow solutions and improvements. Without the
                       awareness (or low threshold of awareness) of a problem – there
                       is little impetus to tackle the problem. For example – if there
                       are perceived to be very few wheelchair users then there is a
                       lower priority given to them in providing an environment for
                       them; in effect there is a «chicken and egg» situation – percei-
                       ved few users so little need to provide for them/little provision
                       for users and hence little use!

                         «The mind is its own place, and in itself
                         Can make a heav’n of hell, a hell of heav’n
                         What matter where, if I be still the same,»
                         John Milton, Paradise Lost

                       So the challenge is to examine how awareness can be raised,
                       attitudes changed, and the whole educational machine kick-
                       started to involve students, educators and those in a position to
                       modify the built environment in a real, social and human topic
                       area.
336                         UNIVERSAL design   Part 3 Asia and Australia




        «The American Institute of Architects has had as its mission
        statement «the increase of public awareness to good design».
        (Pressman, 1997)

      But awareness should catalyse empathy, not sympathy, and lead
      to a condition of active advocacy – a process of change for the
      better.

      Some numerical examples illustrate that the minorities of per-
      sons with a disability, although small in percentage terms, are
      significant in number:
      • By 2030, one in every four Singaporeans will be aged 60 and
         above. Projections by the United Nations see the number of
         people 60 years and older increasing from the present 550
         million to 1.2 billion in 2025 (The Straits Times, 1998).
      • In Western Australia in 1993 a report (Alessandri, Leonard &
         Bower, 1996) grouped disability into five main categories:
         physical (69%), sensory (18%), psychiatric (8%), intellectual
         (3%), acquired brain injury and stroke (2%). The report finds
         that 305,000 Western Australians have a disability (18% of
         the population), within 25 years the number with disabilities
         is set to almost double to more than half a million. Almost 3
         in 4 people with disabilities live in metropolitan areas and
         the most common types of disabilities are physical (about
         13% of the Western Australian population).

      Minority users of the built environment can be categorised as:
      – Persons with physical disabilities
      – Persons with sensory disabilities
      – Persons with cognitive disabilities
      – Persons with multiple disabilities
      – Elderly citizens

      The Imperative for Accessible Design
      A building incorporates many aspects of functional require-
      ments, which are given different priorities according to the buil-
      ding’s use and other factors, often rather arbitrarily arrived at by
      designer or client during briefing (the specifying of a building
      or project). At the most basic level, all buildings (and the built
      environment generally) have to conform to certain minimum
      standards of safety, structural soundness, energy consumption,
      health and hygiene aspects and similar functions. In recent
      years, developing standards worldwide have begun to require
      that buildings used by the public should also be accessible for a
  James D. Harrison
 and Kenneth Parker    Tertiary Education and Promotion in Asia                                337
Singapore University



                       wider range of users than simply the «normal» fit young adult,
                       and allow for safe and convenient use by a wider range of
                       people, including those who have disabilities (permanently or
                       temporarily), are elderly or are encumbered by pushchairs (baby
                       buggies/strollers), wheeled luggage and so on. In many coun-
                       tries this is reinforced by legal requirements such as codes or
                       building byelaws or, more generally, by anti-discrimination acts.

                       In the book chapter «Rethinking the Border in Design» by John
                       Seely Brown and David Duguid the following is stated:

                         «Part of what makes a building «well designed» is the way
                         its designers marshal center-periphery relations. A building
                         stands distinct from, yet related to, its environment.»
                         (Yelavich, 1993)

                       Architecture has been ascribed three characteristics, the last of
                       which distinguishes it from mere building: «Commodity,
                       Firmness and Delight». The functional requirements, structural
                       stability and so on are taken care of in the first two, but it is the
                       third – the introduction of a more intangible aspect of aesthetics
                       which many see as the vital part of creating architecture, rather
                       than making a building. The three should not be mutually
                       exclusive, but it is the subjective which provides the more
                       heroic, creative and artistic aspects and which often disting-
                       uishes the great architects from the hacks. Sadly, this belief
                       often leads to less able designers hiding behind visual devices
                       to cover up mediocre design.

                       In the education of the architect, current thinking is to attempt the
                       difficult task of integrating the technical (including functional
                       planning) with aesthetic decision-making. Of the two aspects, it
                       is the aesthetic that is the more exciting and (apparently) creative,
                       and students are encouraged to experiment with visual qualities
                       (in design schemes on paper or the computer screen, rather than
                       real buildings) as these generate enthusiasm and imagination.
                       The more quantitative side of practicality remains the dowdy
                       poor relation, often considered only as an afterthought, or inclu-
                       ded unwillingly to satisfy tutors’ requirements.

                       The topic of Accessibility usually falls within the category of
                       the technical and quantitative. As a design generator it is not
                       attractive and can rarely be particularly glamorous. Although
                       most people want to live a long life, they have no desire to get
                       old, with the consequent deterioration that it entails, or to
338                        UNIVERSAL design   Part 3 Asia and Australia




      become infirm or disabled, even from a glamorous skiing acci-
      dent. For the young university student this is especially true, as
      his peers will invariably be young and fit, but it also holds for
      most of us. How then can the teaching of accessibility, as a vital
      fundamental principle for design, be inculcated at the right
      point in education – just when ambition, excitement and creati-
      vity are at their peak in the young mind, and ageing and infir-
      mity are distant specks on the horizon of life?


      Architectural Education
      Project-based Learning
      The process by which architects learn to design buildings tends
      to be an elusive one, even if the goals are reasonably well defi-
      ned. For the most part these use methods that are primarily heu-
      ristic and personally explored. Most learning, apart from lecture
      courses on the more technical or theoretical subjects (construc-
      tion, structures, history of architecture etc.), uses the method of
      project work, wherein students are set design problems, of dif-
      fering degrees of complexity or with special sets of objectives.
      In the development of a design scheme, to be presented as dra-
      wings, models (or, more often today, as computer-generated
      graphics), the student will be expected to undertake various
      exploratory work as he/she sees fit, to find exemplars, analyse
      site and functional requirements, make calculations of critical
      technical parts (beam sizes, use of energy related to heat
      loss/gain of the building envelope), and so on. In planning,
      recognition of function and user needs will be developed into a
      planning strategy, with circulation, relationships of rooms and
      activities, layout on site and many other aspects, relative to
      the given constraints of the project. In most Schools of
      Architecture, accessibility issues tend to be learned by default,
      if at all, and present just one of the functional aspects, along
      with fire safety and escape, services routes etc., and it may
      seem a minor diversion compared to some of the other, more
      pressing parameters – unless one is a disabled person, of
      course!

      Lecture Course Content
      As well as learning through design projects, taught subjects
      account for a proportion of the teaching time. Topics of accessi-
      bility may find their way into lectures in various ways: by the
      discussion of buildings codes, for instance, or an appreciation
      of the optimum types of materials to be used for non-slip floo-
  James D. Harrison
 and Kenneth Parker    Tertiary Education and Promotion in Asia                           339
Singapore University



                       ring surfaces, or the specification of appropriate components
                       for sanitary accommodation, handrails and many other details
                       which go to helping a person use a building more conveniently
                       or safely. Building services courses should include information
                       on the need and scope for making a building accessible and
                       usable, for example through the specification of lifts, the
                       requirements for accessible sanitary accommodation, control
                       and alarm systems for use in elderly people’s habitats.
                       Generally the inclusion of such items in the curriculum is very
                       much a matter of how informed and concerned the teaching
                       staff are about matters of accessibility, and may be minimal or
                       even entirely lacking.

                       Levels of Approach
                       In most Schools of Architecture, access issues can be introdu-
                       ced and followed up at the following levels:
                       • Undergraduate
                       • Postgraduate (taught course)
                       • Postgraduate (degree by research)
                       • In-practice Continuing Professional Development (CPD)

                       Learning is a cumulative process, in general, and emphasis will
                       depend on the kind or previous exposure that the learners have
                       already experienced. In many cases, the teacher may be starting
                       from scratch, at any of these levels. Experience suggests that
                       any approaches to the teaching of access issues, whether they
                       are spread over 6 days, or 6 months, should have the following
                       common sequence:
                       1. Benchmarking the individual’s current knowledge base and
                          previous experience, preconceptions and reasons for wishing
                          to study this topic;
                       2. Raising accessibility/design awareness, through:
                          – examples, visits
                          – meetings and contact with users, etc.
                          – simulation exercises
                       3. Pragmatic analysis/application of Codes and functional
                          requirements;
                       4. Holistic practical application of principles, from strategic
                          down to detail level – designs, appraisals/surveys, peer edu-
                          cation;
                       5. Summation, feedback, debriefing, group appraisal of pro-
                          duct. Review of changes in knowledge and attitude since the
                          first «benchmarking» exercise.
340                         UNIVERSAL design   Part 3 Asia and Australia




      Awareness and Knowledge
      Much of the inertia in introducing accessibility into teaching
      curricula in Schools of Architecture and related courses in plan-
      ning, interior design and design-centred engineering is through
      a lack of teachers who are aware and knowledgeable about the
      topic. This presents a very significant constraint to creating an
      accessible world (Harrison and Parker, 1997). Feelings of
      embarrassment, uncertainty about political correctness and lack
      of real knowledge combine to deter many from addressing the
      issue in their teaching.

        «We are our experience which consists of reflecting the world
        in the magic mirror of awareness. Anything else that we
        might regard as constituting «us» is unconscious and so has
        only indirect reality for us.» (Nunn, 1996)

      A lack of awareness of the need for, and realisation of, accessi-
      bility will be as equally prevalent amongst teachers as in stu-
      dents, and this is a problem that should be addressed as a matter
      of urgency. In fact, it may be the teachers who are less able to
      make the shift in mindset than the students. Often the first reac-
      tion to being confronted with the question of access is to think
      of ramps as the first answer, rather than the «level-thinking»
      approach, which reconsiders the fundamental organisation of
      floor levels and vertical circulation from the outset. From expe-
      rience, a reasonable proportion of young minds in Schools of
      Architecture are willing to address social issues and matters of
      concern in design; it is more that they may be misled by tutors
      into being made to feel that these are either irrelevant or too
      complex to handle. When given choices to decide their own
      thesis topics, or to select from a given number of hypothetical
      design solutions, there does not appear to be any discernible
      reluctance on the part of students to select those that have social
      issues as part of their content.

      There may, however, be strong attitudinal barriers put up by the
      teaching side; accessibility (along with other practical pro-
      blems) is seen to stifle creativity – or at least the production of
      exciting-looking project work, which can easily be identified as
      «creative». Other objections given may range from a belief that
      access issues are either too specialised for undergraduates to
      confront, or are too trivial (and this attitude persists in architec-
      tural practice, too, where architects consign these areas to detail
      design by draughtsmen who are familiar with the requisite
      Codes and building regulations).
  James D. Harrison
 and Kenneth Parker    Tertiary Education and Promotion in Asia                             341
Singapore University



                       In reality there is no lack of information on designing for
                       persons with disabilities, but these, along with codes on
                       accessibility, tend to look very complicated to the newcomer, or
                       fail to convey the real reasons why such modified design
                       thinking is necessary.

                       Demystifying Accessibility
                       Any attempt at introducing accessibility as a universal principle
                       in the teaching of architecture must tread the fine line between
                       being identifiable as appropriate and applicable, related to stu-
                       dents’ experience and sensibilities, and avoiding becoming seen
                       as «do-gooding», in a patronising way. This last attitude will
                       perpetuate the problem of consigning designing for persons
                       with disabilities to the limits of «special needs» – with separate
                       routes, facilities and entrances, rather than being inclusive and
                       relevant for all users in the same place.

                       It may also be difficult to find appropriate and simple examples
                       of good design of accessibility in action; in itself, the best
                       accessible design is indistinguishable from everyday good
                       design. Only a trained eye, or a person who has experienced the
                       barrier-strewn world at first-hand elsewhere, will appreciate the
                       integration of level floors, convenient handrails and all the com-
                       monplace things that go to make up the building that accords to
                       universal design.

                       Methodology of Learning
                       Basic Design Courses
                       Students of architecture generally start out their architectural
                       education with open minds. Basic design courses provide exhi-
                       larating projects through which the student learns to weigh the
                       design parameters, as well as find ways and new confidence to
                       explore creative ideas and apply imagination. Training in obser-
                       vation, recording and analysing, and communicating intentions
                       should be an intrinsic part of the first year studies. Identifying
                       human needs, and providing for these by planning, design of
                       three-dimensional spaces and utility objects forms a part of this,
                       along with the why and how of making a building in all its
                       aspects. (Harrison, 1996)

                         «Skills training begins with an explanation of the skills to be
                         learned. Since this is the first in a series of skills training
                         sessions, the information is intended to establish a positive
                         orientation to skills training and to the potential for
                         behavioral change.» (Beddel & Lennox, 1997)
342                          UNIVERSAL design   Part 3 Asia and Australia




      Anthropometrics and Ergonomics
      for First Year Students
      One commonly taught project in almost any first semester will
      cover aspects of anthropometry and simple ergonomics – the
      dimensional aspects of the human body and applications of this
      to functional design of everyday objects and places.
      Traditionally, however, the exemplars for the human physical
      dimensions have been taken from sources that have been con-
      cerned with medians and the «average» man and woman. It has
      even been found that data being used in one School of
      Architecture in a developing country was based on American
      army personnel – who would have been selected as conforming
      to certain height and weight constraints. Current enlightened
      thinking appreciates the fact that there is no such thing as an
      «average user» and that designers should consider those who
      have limited physical mobility and manipulation, as these are
      the most vulnerable and thus the most deserving of considerate
      design. A tall man may be able to reach down, but a short per-
      son, such as a child, will have to bring a stool to stand on in
      order to reach a tall switch, for instance.




      Anthropometric dummies can be constructed to aid the appreciation of a
      diverse range of user abilities.

      This first introduction to the relationship between the physical
      world and human needs is a vital part of the formative process
      of the designer, but very few Schools of Architecture have this
      approach in place. The ideal course would cover mean and
      median sizes of the human body, and also incorporate such
      circumstances as the limited reach, manoeuvrability and eye-
  James D. Harrison
 and Kenneth Parker    Tertiary Education and Promotion in Asia                                343
Singapore University



                       height of a person sitting in a wheelchair, or an appreciation of
                       how a person would use a staircase if they had a paralysed leg.
                       Following the analytical part of the projects, a related design
                       exercise would be set; both to consolidate the knowledge acqui-
                       red and apply this in a practical way.

                       To make this academic exercise all the more significant,
                       situations where students are designing for real clients would
                       be ideal. Few Schools of Architecture have faculty members
                       with physical disabilities, so user-groups, from disabled peo-
                       ples’ associations or senior citizens groups, could be brought in
                       to help to devise design projects, meet students and pass on
                       their experiences, including what they find good and bad in the
                       built environment, and act as critics for reviews of project work.

                       Empathy and Simulation Exercises

                         «Certainly, the ability to enter the private world of another
                         person in a nonjudgmental way is essential to our use of the
                         concept of empathy.» (Beddel & Lennox, c1997)

                       a. Introduction
                       In order to bring students to an understanding and appreciation
                       of the range of obstacles faced by people with disabilities they
                       need to see, at first hand, what constitutes a barrier or a diffi-
                       culty. Whilst passive observation of a user, either in real life or
                       through a video film, is a telling way, a far more memorable
                       method is to require the participant to try using a wheelchair, or
                       to be temporarily disabled in some way, and then to have to
                       cope with a familiar world in a new way.

                       Opinions vary about the efficacy of simulation exercises, in
                       which participants are «disabled» in various ways, and have to
                       use assistive devices in order to move around. (Further informa-
                       tion on this topic has been published (Harrison and Parker,
                       1997b)). In order that they do not underrate the limitations that a
                       person with a disability has to bear, it is really necessary for the
                       exercise to be sustained over a reasonably long period, and the
                       subject(s) to be honour-bound not to cheat. Obviously it is impos-
                       sible to really feel the whole range of frustrations and handicaps
                       that a wheelchair user, for instance, has to face in a typical jour-
                       ney to work, or trying to use public transport. But it is generally a
                       memorable experience and, provided that the subjects are pro-
                       perly briefed and the exercise properly conducted, is likely to
                       have more of a beneficial effect than cause real misunderstanding.
344                           UNIVERSAL design    Part 3 Asia and Australia




      A Simulation Exercise, experiencing the barriers presented by the built
      environment to persons with physical and sensory disability.

      b. Briefing
      It should be said that the correct briefing and conduct of the
      exercise is most important; it may trivialise the exercise to
      allow students simply to «play» with wheelchairs or walking
      frames for only a short period. Initially, embarrassment may
      manifest itself in horsing around, but after a time the gravity of
      the problems should begin to be felt. The opening part of a
      well-conducted exercise should follow a well-defined route,
      which provides both sufficient barriers and also purpose-
      designed amenities to demonstrate how easy it is for a designer
      unwittingly to cause a barrier to, say, a wheelchair user, and
      also how simple matters such as a wide and easily-opened door
      can make life a lot easier.

      c. Inter-disciplinary Personnel
      Personnel for the conduct of the exercise should include an
      experienced Occupational Therapist, who will explain the
      nature of some of the more commonly-experienced disabilities,
      as well as how to use the assistive devices provided, to strap up
      legs, demonstrate how a wheelchair should be handled and
      adjust crutches. They should accompany the groups around the
      first stage, until each individual is familiar with their allotted
      «disability». Safety is an important consideration and, in order
      not to cause actual physical danger to the students, the briefing
      should apprise them of possible hazards. The Occupational
      Therapist should also attend the debriefing session, which
      should be held at the end of the exercise. For discussion at this
  James D. Harrison
 and Kenneth Parker    Tertiary Education and Promotion in Asia                                      345
Singapore University



                       session, students should be required to log all the difficulties
                       and feelings that they had during the exercise, and to then com-
                       pare their experiences.




                       Occupational Therapists are excellent at describing different abilities and
                       instructing on the correct use of assistive devices.

                       The participation of an experienced designer or disabled user
                       will also be useful, to explain everyday situations and how they
                       can be overcome, and to accompany the group at the start.
                       Ideally the given exercise route should not present too many
                       insurmountable barriers, but also demonstrate the importance
                       of ramp slope, door openings, floor finishes and many other
                       design considerations. One useful experience is for the trainees
                       to see how a person needs grab rails and space in the right
                       places, in order to transfer from wheelchair to toilet and back
                       again. To the majority of architects and architectural students
                       this comes as a complete revelation.

                       d. Logistics
                       In theory the simulation exercise is a very good thing, but logis-
                       tically it may have drawbacks. The class size in a School of
                       Architecture could have around 100 students, so would need to
                       be broken down into smaller groups, with the exercises phased
                       over the academic year. Hire or loan of the right amount of
                       suitable equipment might be difficult or expensive, too, and the
                       pressure on time will be a problem for both trainers and stu-
                       dents. For smaller elective groups, of students from higher years,
                       more sustained exercises would be possible and associated pro-
                       jects could be tailored to their stage of academic development.
346                          UNIVERSAL design    Part 3 Asia and Australia




      More limited objective exercises could be devised, with equal
      success, in which groups of students concentrate on one aspect
      of accessibility (such as staircases for ambulant disabled and
      elderly people, or a swing door). By selecting a suitable example,
      testing it themselves under simulation conditions, observing
      how real-life users cope with it (and possibly interviewing these
      subjects and/or making a video of the item in use), as well as
      measuring and analysing its success or weaknesses, students
      could collectively cover a whole range of design aspects as a
      design guide for their use – possibly to be published on the
      World Wide Web or the educational establishment’s Intranet.

      e. Debriefing
      The experiences of the participants should be discussed in a
      group, led by an experienced facilitator. Recording, on a flip-
      chart or overhead projector transparency, is useful to emphasise
      the value of each individual’s response, and also to help share
      collective experiences.

      From the individual’s point of view, reference to his/her original
      «Benchmarking» statement will prove invaluable, to show how
      much attitude, awareness and (recent) experience has been
      affected by this exposure. Individual participants should be
      encouraged to write up their findings, perhaps in the form of a
      logbook, and continue to keep this updated with experiences
      and new information during the course of the academic session.




      The debriefing is an essential component of Simulation Exercises and
      Access Audits.
  James D. Harrison
 and Kenneth Parker    Tertiary Education and Promotion in Asia                               347
Singapore University



                       Associated Design Exercises
                       In conjunction with the simulation exercise, simple planning
                       exercises can be devised, in which full-size mock-ups of spaces
                       can be created and tested by their designers, using the range of
                       assistive devices. Generally such exercises will be limited to
                       fairly simple situations; as staircases and ramps, for instance,
                       would be difficult to construct without more sophisticated test
                       rigs. The use of masking tape on a conveniently tiled floor (each
                       tile being 300 mm square) has proven useful at the Asian
                       Training Centre on Ageing, School of Nursing, University of
                       Chiang Mai (ATCOA) training sessions on designing for the
                       elderly and disabled. Here, different types of toilet and
                       bathroom configurations are explored by groups of up to 5
                       people, and drawn up after conclusion.

                       Another possibility would be to arrange for a small group of
                       students to design a space for a particular individual – a wheel-
                       chair user, perhaps, and to work with that person to propose
                       adaptations of his/her working space, kitchen or other functio-
                       nal area. Unfortunately, willing real-life subjects are all too
                       rare, but in an enlightened institution they might be employed
                       as part time studio demonstrators or the equivalent.




                                                                        A washroom ‘mock
                                                                        up’, using sticky
                                                                        tape for walls and
                                                                        a chair as the
                                                                        water closet, being
                                                                        tested for use-
                                                                        ability.
348                        UNIVERSAL design   Part 3 Asia and Australia




      Access Surveys
      Access surveys provide a useful way to identify the range of
      barriers that many buildings and the built environment (which
      includes streets and transportation facilities) present. They can
      focus one’s appreciation of the accessible qualities of an envi-
      ronment, and will help to attune students’ minds to identifying
      handicapping or potentially hazardous conditions in many
      aspects of the built environment. Standard survey forms (or
      «audit» as it is sometimes referred to) may be used but, as a
      learning exercise, it can be advantageous for students to design
      their own survey forms in the first instance. They would then
      try them out in a limited exercise, as a learning exercise, before
      amending them and comparing these to existing forms. These
      might differentiate between interiors of buildings and outdoor
      spaces or streetscapes, according to the context. Surveys should
      have a positive outcome, possibly in the form of a set of propo-
      sals for upgrading, or an information sheet to help a disabled
      person choose which buildings to visit. Without a useful end
      product, the impression that the participant takes away is prima-
      rily a negative one, and may confirm misconceived ideas that
      access issues are always non-creative.

      Design Projects & Design Theses
      Critical Analysis
      One of the problems associated with the teaching of accessible
      design is that there is a continuing dearth of good examples to
      demonstrate that it can create and not hinder elegant design.
      When students experience their everyday habitats from a wheel-
      chair, or grope their way round in a blindfold they might con-
      clude that everything about accessibility is negative. Whilst it is
      easy to be critical, this should be undertaken in the spirit of
      analysis, followed by synthesis and proposals for improvement.
      Any critical study of a building or place should conclude that,
      whilst the (unintentionally-placed) barriers that we find in our
      built environment are random and individual (since they are not
      actually intended to be barriers, but are so by default), the well-
      designed and accessible environment can be perceived as a
      holistic system. In this light, design intentions are more than the
      piecemeal removal from a design already in process; they are a
      fundamental part of a whole system of design – and one that is
      delightfully simple, once grasped.

      So that young designers do not see designing for accessibility
      always as a negative and constraining factor, design projects
  James D. Harrison
 and Kenneth Parker    Tertiary Education and Promotion in Asia                               349
Singapore University



                       should test the designers’ ingenuity, whilst throwing the respon-
                       sibility of creating user-friendly architecture onto them. From
                       experience, the majority of students will rise to this challenge,
                       even if it is out of sympathy rather than empathy – the latter
                       being the ideal motivational source.

                       Design Project Work
                       In a School of Architecture, design project work, although
                       rarely built, is a serious task. Responsibility for many aspects of
                       the complete building, from constructional system, through
                       environmental control and human comfort strategies, to specifi-
                       cation of materials, components, or fixtures and fittings, may
                       all be required to be covered (in principle if not in detail) in the
                       more advanced project work. Depending on the level of deve-
                       lopment of the students, such applications will become increa-
                       singly sophisticated as they progress, and the parameters will
                       increase with the scale and complexity of the project vehicle.

                       In work in the lower and intermediate years, it would be reason-
                       able to expect that some demonstration of planning for elderly
                       people or people with disabilities would be evident in project
                       work. In order to emphasise certain points on accessibility, a tutor
                       might set a project which had a «special needs» requirement,
                       such as a housing project for elderly people, through which the
                       students might experience applying the principles of design for
                       safety and independent personal mobility as basic criteria in their
                       design solutions. Where codes on accessibility are already in
                       force, students would normally be required to satisfy these, as a
                       bare minimum, in any project that is designed for public use.

                       Elective Work
                       Much of what has been discussed previously would be equally
                       applicable for postgraduate or more experienced design stu-
                       dents, either if they had not experienced this teaching at a lower
                       level, or if they wished to continue studies in this field, (for
                       instance, if their dissertation proposal covered some aspect of
                       accessibility or sensory limitation.)

                       Electives can allow many activities to take place, provided that
                       they relate in some way to the betterment of design or its cultu-
                       ral or technical bases. From experience gained in running elec-
                       tives with Masters students of Architecture (with recent
                       professional practice experience), there is reason to be optimis-
                       tic for the longer-term future of accessible buildings. In a
                       semester of 13 teaching weeks, groups of between 8 and 16
350                        UNIVERSAL design   Part 3 Asia and Australia




      students, who had chosen this elective over other different
      topics, came to the subject with little or no previous exposure to
      it, but rapidly developed experience and confidence to trust
      their own judgment and to collect their findings in a form
      which could be passed on to others.

      A ‘typical’ elective programme structure (by week):
       1. Introduction and discussion. The nature of barriers and dis-
          ability. Definitions and attitudes.
       2. The concept of Non-handicapping Environments, Universal
          and Inclusive Design. Video presentations and discussion.
       3. Simulation exercise. Feedback on experiences.
       4. Discussion. Special needs. Physical, sensory and intellec-
          tual disability. Potential architectural solutions.
       5. Design for visual impairment.
       6. Design for hearing impairment.
       7. The wheelchair and ambulant disabled – ergonomics,
          ramps, etc.
       8. Mobility and safety in the built environment. Hazards and
          the need for codes and legislation.
       9. Access audits for buildings, streets and transportation sys-
          tems.
      10. Aesthetic aspects, advocacy methodologies.
      11. Products and solutions, high and low technology answers
          for specific spaces and activities.
      12. Lifetime homes, adaptable housing, design for “our future
          selves”.
      13. Future developments, codes and legislation. Awareness into
          action.

      But, it should be noted that the above can be delivered in a dif-
      ferent order and can be adapted to capitalise on any ‘live’ pro-
      jects that may arise. Coursework and project work can also
      cover specific areas and, where possible, guided peer learning is
      a preferable modus operandi. It is also beneficial to visit vari-
      ous disability groups to show that these topic areas are related
      to the quality of life of people.

      In the first year of running the Masters Elective course, the
      group underwent a simulation exercise, meeting with disability
      groups, social workers and occupational therapists. As part of
      the submission requirement, the group were asked to select a
      topic and medium to demonstrate what they had learned during
      the elective. From the contacts made, they chose to make a
      video which primarily tracked and recorded some aspects of the
  James D. Harrison
 and Kenneth Parker    Tertiary Education and Promotion in Asia                            351
Singapore University



                       daily life of a willing subject, who is a paraplegic. They simply
                       filmed some of the more difficult situations that he faced, and
                       compared it to an able-bodied person in the same situations.
                       This was backed up by interviews with occupational therapists,
                       and footage of discussions amongst themselves. The intention
                       was that this would form the starting point for the elective
                       group in the following year – which has proved a useful gambit
                       in subsequent years.




                       Measurement and assessment are key components of an Access Audit.

                       In following years the groups produced analytical appraisals
                       based on building surveys, of transport interchanges, and of
                       environments as used by people with sight and hearing pro-
                       blems. In each case this was their own chosen topic, and has
                       formed a resource for other students (as well as being shown in
                       overseas contexts, to encourage other teachers to set up similar
                       courses). In the academic year 1997/98, elective students pro-
                       duced a useful wayfinding map, for use by people with disabili-
                       ties, of Orchard Road in Singapore, the main shopping and
                       hotel area; this complemented a brochure listing accessible
                       buildings which is produced by the Handicaps Welfare
                       Association and the Tourist Promotion Board in Singapore,
                       which is updated every few years. By carrying out this work in
                       conjunction with the major disability group in the country, the
                       students have a positive goal, which raises the profile of access
                       as a valid topic, in education as in other aspects of life.
352                        UNIVERSAL design   Part 3 Asia and Australia




      Dissertation Topics: Individual Study of
      Accessibility Topics
      Each year a number of final year students choose a topic related
      to some aspect of disability, design for ageing or more speciali-
      sed areas related to special needs provision for their elective.
      Sometimes this is a primer for the subsequent design thesis
      work, but not necessarily. At the National University of
      Singapore, students are able to choose the stream in which their
      topic most naturally rests; amongst these, the most obvious
      ones are building studies, environmental studies or urban
      studies. Supervisors for these topics would not necessarily be
      architects, but could be building services engineers, or from
      other specialised fields.

      Research and Postgraduate Work
      As with dissertation topics, areas for higher degrees by research
      may benefit from mutual relationships between supervisor and
      research student. This is already true in the sciences and engi-
      neering, but appears to have been slower to catch on in Schools
      of Architecture. The setting up of a dedicated research centre,
      or unit within a more generalised one, would be an ideal way to
      encourage more researchers and generate greater interaction
      between allied disciplines.

      Reciprocal Teaching
      Cross-discipline teaching, and joint project work should be
      encouraged; for example an “Introduction to Universal Design”
      class can be conducted with students studying Industrial
      Design.

      The success of teaching accessibility in Schools of Architecture
      depends to quite an extent on the contribution of people from
      outside, who have experience and expertise – including disabled
      people who have first-hand knowledge of using accessibility
      aids and the built environment with all its faults. Specialists in
      the field of Occupational Health and Rehabilitation can prove
      useful contributors, although many professional designers have
      scant idea what they do, or how their expertise might help in the
      design of a building to be user-friendly. Similarly, many medi-
      cal and health professionals are unaware of the potential
      contribution that the architectural profession could bring to
      rehabilitation and adaptation of homes for disabled people and
      many similar situations.
  James D. Harrison
 and Kenneth Parker    Tertiary Education and Promotion in Asia                              353
Singapore University



                       Occupational Therapists can make a useful contribution to the
                       running of simulation exercises and, just as they can help archi-
                       tectural students, so can design teachers reciprocate by assisting
                       in the teaching of simple aspects of building adaptation, reading
                       and preparing sketch proposals for home adaptations and so on.
                       At the National University of Singapore, a member of the
                       Architecture staff regularly runs a short workshop with student
                       Occupational Therapists from the School of Health Sciences at
                       a local Polytechnic, to demonstrate aspects of drawing; in return
                       their tutor comes into the School of Architecture to help con-
                       duct simulation exercises. As well as the synergy of sharing
                       skills, it also means that students learn some awareness of
                       parallel professional skills, which may be useful in the future.

                       Teaching the Teachers
                       Many teachers of architecture continue to equate designing
                       accessible environments with liberally dispersing long ramps
                       floor to floor and large blue wheelchair/handicapped users
                       signs. Or their limited knowledge of building codes may feel
                       that disabled users will be adequately served, just as long as the
                       rules are satisfied to the letter. As a result, they may discourage
                       their students from attempting to explore more logical and wor-
                       kable solutions in design project work. Alternatively, they may
                       feel that engineering solutions, with a plethora of specially
                       designed lifts and hoists, automatically opening doors and other
                       expensive features should create an accessible building. In this,
                       there is surely a need to acquaint all studio teaching staff and
                       specialist lecturers with the principles, value and relative sim-
                       plicity of designing for universal accessibility; such a possibi-
                       lity is so obvious, and yet there have been few, if any initiatives
                       specifically for this amongst Schools of Architecture. And even
                       if there were, they would probably only attract those who were
                       already reasonably knowledgeable and committed.
354                        UNIVERSAL design   Part 3 Asia and Australia




      2. Advocacy and Promotion of Universal
      Design in Asia
      Continuing Professional Development:
      Short Courses
      Schools of Architecture which have the expertise, and can call
      on the services of outside specialists, have a duty to extend their
      knowledge to today’s practitioners in as many ways as possible.
      One of the most significant of these is in the form of a taught
      workshop course, which is aimed specifically at the design pro-
      fessions – architects, engineers, planners, and anyone involved
      in the commissioning or running of buildings. Depending on
      the participants’ specialisms and backgrounds, courses could
      follow many of the aspects discussed previously.

      Whereas full-time students have broadly similar background
      knowledge bases, maturity and experience of learning, professi-
      onals who partake in in-career upgrading (or who are coerced to
      attend courses to maintain their professional recognitions) are
      more diverse in their educational needs and wants. For this
      reason, a more participative learning style is recommended. For
      example, the participants can be requested to develop their own
      access audit checklist and will, later, be more appreciative of a
      ‘real’ checklist when this is provided.

      In Chiang Mai in Northern Thailand the Asian Training Centre
      on Ageing (ATCOA) runs an annual course on designing for
      elderly and disabled people, aimed at professionals and caregi-
      vers from mixed disciplines, which some architectural teachers
      have attended. To date, there have been few other educational
      initiatives in Southeast Asia.

      This is clearly an area in which there is a need for the develop-
      ment of courses and teaching materials that are attractive and
      usable in different places.

        «Understanding others involves more than intuition or «gut»
        feelings. Such an unstructured and subjective approach to
        understanding others is not sufficiently rigorous or reliable
        to be useful.» (Beddel & Lennox, 1997)

      Lectures and discussions have their limitations and simulation
      exercises have a role to play in changing, and adding to,
      people’s experience and heightening empathy and involvement.
      Meeting the end users with disabilities and seeing the «human
  James D. Harrison
 and Kenneth Parker    Tertiary Education and Promotion in Asia                              355
Singapore University



                       face» and real need for non-handicapping built environments is
                       genuine and, to some, quite emotional.

                       However, not everyone agrees that simulation exercises are the
                       answer:

                         «These are degrading no amount of explanation can be used
                         to show how this exercise devalues people with disabilities.
                         (If I copied my father’s walk to find out what it was like, I
                         would be modelling his position rather than recognising his
                         attributes and strengths as a human).» (Felix, 1998)

                       This is not easy to answer, but the above refers to the European
                       experience and not to simulation exercises in Asia. Obviously,
                       there are cultural and behavioural differences («horses for cour-
                       ses») and the disability movements are well developed and
                       empowered in the West (with legislative acts – for example, the
                       Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) and various anti-discri-
                       mination laws and codes). When run properly, simulation expe-
                       riences are very powerful tools (and, incidentally, they are a tool
                       currently used in U.K. hospitals when training nurses and
                       Occupational Therapists). Examples of four major simulation
                       programmes in Asia, all with positive results, are described
                       below:

                       – The Asian Training Centre on Ageing (ATCOA) in Chiang
                         Mai, Thailand, runs courses about designing for persons with
                         disabilities and the lasting impact is seen from the many par-
                         ticipants who keep in touch (networking).
                       – The United Nations Economic and Social Commission for
                         Asia and the Pacific (UN ESCAP) held a training/awareness
                         course in May 1997 in Bangkok, Thailand. This exercise was
                         instrumental in supporting a UN Pilot Project to improve the
                         street facilities for a one square kilometre of Bangkok in
                         advance of the FESPIC Games (Harrison & Parker, 1998).
                         The success was so great that over 20 kilometres of tactile
                         paving strips (a textured surface that has a number of designs
                         which can inform a blind person through contact with a cane
                         or directly via their feet) and safe footpaths and street furni-
                         ture have been installed (with facilities for wheelchair users,
                         the deaf and the blind) which benefits all users.
                       – The «Day in a Wheelchair» event in Singapore on 14 March
                         1999 was probably the largest simultaneous simulation exer-
                         cise held to date. This had a number of agenda – to provide a
                         simulation exercise for about 150 able-bodied participants
356                        UNIVERSAL design   Part 3 Asia and Australia




        (spread over 17 routes in Singapore), to bring the problems
        of access to the built environment, and the problems of inde-
        pendent wheelchair-bound living, to the attention of the
        public, politicians and the media. Two research questionnai-
        res were issued to the participants to gauge their pre and post
        experience feelings and attitudinal shifts, and the findings
        were positive.
      – Simulation exercises conducted on the Elective Course «The
        Accessible Environment” at the School of Architecture,
        National University of Singapore. This course is targeted at
        level one Masters in Architecture students and has proven
        popular and influential, being well subscribed for six conse-
        cutive years.

      Other Initiatives
      The awareness and confidence of professional designers needs
      to be increased, as a matter of urgency (Harrison and Parker,
      1997a). Research work done by units looking at aspects of
      designing for disability and the creation of accessible environ-
      ments should address this need, and the dissemination of good
      examples, (including case studies, specific design solutions,
      cost appraisals etc.) is one way in which this could be done.

      Ongoing research and technical studies can help professionals
      by applying expertise to:
      – commentaries on current and proposed design codes and
        building regulations;
      – writing readable articles on accessibility topics, in professio-
        nal journals, including critical analysis of built examples;
      – development of award schemes, to encourage professionals
        (and, equally important, clients and building owners) to spe-
        cify and create accessible buildings.


      3. Discussion
      Priorities in teaching accessibility-oriented education in Schools
      of Architecture and allied design may be summarised as:
      – introduction to anthropometrics for disability as a part of
         basic design courses;
      – continuous stress in design project work on need to design
         for barrier-free environments;
      – consistent approach to technical and constructional aspects;
      – elective courses, with simulation exercises and project-based
         goals;
  James D. Harrison
 and Kenneth Parker    Tertiary Education and Promotion in Asia                             357
Singapore University



                       – encouragement of integration of current research topics into
                         postgraduate and thesis work;
                       – teaching the teachers;
                       – continuing professional development courses, to inform and
                         update professionals’ skills;
                       – interpretation of existing legislation on accessibility in the
                         built environment, building codes and implications of other
                         pressures, such as Anti-discrimination Acts; comparison with
                         other countries’ codes, and feedback to code-makers;
                       – mutual links between other disciplines with similar aims and
                         with user-groups, particularly welfare associations of dis-
                         abled people;
                       – need for a database of a range of exemplars, ranging from
                         high- to low-tech, and including no-cost solutions.

                       Overcoming the initial uncertainty about how effective such
                       teaching should be is the most significant hurdle. It is necessary
                       only to demonstrate that access is achievable, and by what
                       means, and that even the simplest improvement could make a
                       world of difference to a person who is now handicapped by the
                       unconsidered environmental mistakes of their habitat.

                       We are nearing the end of the United Nations «Decade of
                       Disabled persons, 1993–2002». It is thus timely to ask why and
                       how we are preparing our future generations of designers of the
                       built environment to provide habitats for everyone without dis-
                       crimination relating to age or ability.

                       Those with intellectual disabilities should not be forgotten, and
                       a safe, well-signed, built environment will prove better and less
                       intimidating for this user-group too. But, as this cohort grows in
                       numbers and percentage terms, their wants and needs will
                       require attention – especially if and when life spans increase
                       dramatically, with advances and application of medical techno-
                       logy, to 120–130 years.

                       Who should decide the form that future habitats may take?
                       When professional planners, urban designers and architects are
                       involved in decision making at strategic levels, they must trans-
                       cend the boundaries of their own disciplines, to listen to the
                       views of other parties who have knowledge of other particular
                       aspects of how to make the urban structure work, not just more
                       efficiently, but with greater diversity and with greater emphasis
                       on human quality of life values, which are less easy to quantify.
                       Taking the holistic view is not easy, and implementing it
358                        UNIVERSAL design   Part 3 Asia and Australia




      demands new attitudes to be developed – but its benefits will be
      far reaching – both in the number of people that it serves and in
      the long-term satisfaction that it brings.

      The main forms of active discrimination are well known –
      sexual discrimination, religious discrimination and racial discri-
      mination. Developments in anti-discrimination legislation and
      education help to reduce prejudices and change society’s attitu-
      des and tolerances. Discrimination is found in many other
      forms – sometimes intentionally but often occurring unintentio-
      nally, through ignorance or apathy. Where persons with disabili-
      ties and elderly persons are hindered by the built environment,
      and thus unable to use it in the same way as the majority of the
      population, this may be defined as discrimination (Imrie, 1996).
      Experiential discrimination occurs where certain individuals or
      groups are denied the same experience as others.

      But increased awareness is not the «end goal’ – this is just the
      catalyst to change towards achieving a truly accessible environ-
      ment. There are many «barriers» to be overcome – attitudinal,
      physical, mechanical, technological, economical, social and
      cultural – but the resulting habitat will be worth the struggle
      and effort and the benefits are many in both the near and long
      terms. An investment in non-handicapping built environments
      is an investment towards a better quality of life, and can be a
      common goal for all inhabitants.

      References
      Alessandri, L. M., Leonard, H. and Bower, C. Disability
        Counts: a Profile of People with Disabilities in Western
        Australia. Perth, Western Australia: Disability Services
        Commission. 1996.
      Beddel, Jeffrey T. & Lennox, Shelley S. Handbook for
        Communication and Problem-solving Skills Training : A
        Cognitive-behavioral Approach. Wiley. New York. 1997.
      Centre on Environments for the Handicapped. Access by Design
        – Implementing the Disability Discrimination Act. Videotape.
        London. 1997
      Felix, Robert. Letter to K. J. Parker. Leeds Metropolitan
        University, U.K. 1998.
      Harrison, J.D. Access in the Curriculum. Access by Design, the
        Journal of the Centre for Accessible Environments. London,
        U.K. May/August 1996.
  James D. Harrison
 and Kenneth Parker    Tertiary Education and Promotion in Asia                         359
Singapore University



                       Harrison, J.D and Parker, K.J. Universal Accessibility:
                         Awareness and Attitudes. MERA (Man – Environment
                         Research Association), International Conference on
                         Environment-Behaviour Studies for the 21st Century. Tokyo,
                         Japan. 1997. (a)
                       Harrison, J.D and Parker, K.J. Disability Simulations and
                         Access Audits: Studying Disability and Accessibility. 31st
                         Annual Conference of the Australian and New Zealand
                         Architectural Science Association: Principles and Practice.
                         Queensland University of Technology. Brisbane, Australia.
                         1997. (b)
                       Harrison J. D. and Parker, K. J. Pavements for Pedestrians –
                         Regaining the Street. Designing for the 21st Century,
                         International Conference on Universal Design, New York.
                         1998.
                       Imrie, R. Disability and the City: International Perspectives.
                         London: Paul Chapman Publishing. 1996.
                       Nunn, C. Awareness: What it is, What it does. London; New
                         York: Routledge. 1996.
                       Ostergaard P. Handicap, Architecture and Design. CD-ROM.
                         Christian Ejlers, Publishers. Denmark. 1996.
                       Pressman, Andy. Professional Practice 101: A Compendium of
                         Business and Management Strategies in Architecture. New
                         York: J. Wiley & Sons. 1997.
                       The Straits Times. U. N. Hopes to Change Biases Against
                         Elderly People. Singapore: Newspaper. 6 November 1998.
                       Yelavich, Susan (Ed.). The Edge of the Millennium: An
                         International Critique of Architecture, Urban Planning,
                         Product and Communication Design. New York: Whitney
                         Library of Design. 1993.
360   UNIVERSAL design   Part 3 Asia and Australia




                                                     Photo: FotoKnutsen AS
Kaname Yanagisawa
   Chiba University,   Collaborative Design Studio for Universal Design in Chiba University     361
             Japan




                       3.4 Collaborative
                       Design Studio for
                       Universal Design in
                       Chiba University
                       Professor Kaname Yanagisawa, Ph.D., Department of Design
                       and Architecture, Chiba University, Japan.


                       Background
                       The Department of Design and Architecture at Chiba University
                       was founded in 1997, when it was reorganized from two depart-
                       ments, the Department of Industrial Design and the Department
                       of Architecture. There are two courses taught independently:
                       industrial design and architecture.

                       We are trying to combine various studio programs to promote
                       student exchange and give the students a wider view of design,
                       from product to architecture. The collaborative design studio
                       was started in 1998. In the second collaborative studio in 1999,
                       we aimed to have both courses participating together in the
                       Universal Design Competition.

                       Outline of the collaborative design
                       studio 1999
                       Theme:          Designing a restaurant interior from the viewpoint
                                       of universal design
                       Period:         December 1999 to February 2000.
                       Process:        The work was undertaken in close collaboration
                                       between the faculty staff and students from both the
                                       Design and the Architecture courses. At first, a lec-
                                       ture on universal design was given to both groups
                                       of students. The students then used the existing
                                       building as a case study for a survey, presented
                                       their findings and exchanged ideas. In the next sta-
                                       ges, the students used the case study as basis for the
                                       design of a universally designed restaurant.
                       Result:         It was the first time both groups of students were
                                       able to exchange ideas and gain knowledge of each
362                           UNIVERSAL design   Part 3 Asia and Australia




                other’s fields. The students learned the concept of
                universal design through the collaborative work
                between the two courses.
      Feedback: We hope to continue the idea of making a mixed
                group with design and architecture students next
                year, thus promoting more mutual understanding.

      Case study and review
      Students surveyed the existing building as a case study and ana-
      lysed it from the viewpoint of universal design. This included
      elements such as non-physical barriers, useful spaces for all
      generations, colours and textures that aid orientation, or com-
      fortable environment. They took two weeks for the case study
      and its presentation.

      On the day of the review, the faculty staff first made a brief
      comment on the students’ works. The students from both cour-
      ses then looked closely at the presentation board before presen-
      ting their schemes individually. To conclude the session, the
      faculty staff of the architecture and design course reviewed the
      works and exchanged opinions.




      Both architecture and design students looked closely at each work.



      Design work and review
      On the design of the restaurant, the architecture students
      worked individually. The design students formed groups of 3–4
      students who worked together, which is normal practice in the
      design course. Although the architecture students and the
Kaname Yanagisawa
   Chiba University,   Collaborative Design Studio for Universal Design in Chiba University   363
             Japan



                       design students did not cooperate directly, they exchanged ideas
                       informally quite often during the design stage.

                       Common to both groups was that they made an effort to intro-
                       duce the idea and feedback to their design work from the last
                       case study review. Some students chose to design a new buil-
                       ding, while other students designed a scheme for renewing an
                       existing structure. This part of the studio went on for a period of
                       three weeks.

                       On the day of the final review, students of both courses, archi-
                       tecture and design, made a presentation in turn. Faculty staff of
                       the architecture and design course and three guest critics re-
                       viewed the works, and exchanged opinions.




                       A group of design students gave a presentation to the others.



                       Types of design solutions
                       Each student or group of students created various kinds of inte-
                       rior spaces in the restaurant. The faculty staff concluded to
                       realize the studio in which both architecture and design students
                       would make a group together for more cooperation. There were
                       few differences between the approach and results of architec-
                       ture students and design students, but the students understood
                       the concept of universal design in slightly different ways, and
                       consequently chose different design solutions. The types of
                       design solutions were as follows:
364                         UNIVERSAL design   Part 3 Asia and Australia




      1. Physical solution
      A lot of students thought that the concept of universal design is
      the same as barrier free design. They tried to avoid steps,
      making a flat floor, or introduced a slope and an elevator. Some
      students made wider circulation or corridor spaces for easy
      movement for elderly and handicapped persons. These physical
      solutions might be fundamental to universal design.

      2. Environmental or cognitive solution
      Some students considered colour or material an important issue
      in universal design. They thought that friendly colours and
      coordination of materials would make people feel comfortable
      and make the environment understandable. Both issues may of
      course be of particular importance for elderly and handicapped
      people. Other students introduced systems to provide easy liste-
      ning music, aroma, nice view of nature, for healing and joy. All
      these environmental and cognitive approaches have relevance in
      a universal design context.

      3. Selectiveness for all types of people
      Some students considered that selection of place for different
      users of the restaurant would be important. They therefore
      introduced various types of places that could be chosen accor-
      ding to user’s preference or ability, presenting a variety of
      colours and decoration, food types and interior atmosphere, size
      of room and seating arrangements, seating styles and levels of
      privacy. As universal design is the design for all types of peo-
      ple, having multiple choices might well seem a reasonable idea.

      4. Exchange between generations
      Some students introduced a place to promote intercourse
      between different generations. An example of this is a design
      where the restaurant has an area designed both for children’s
      play and for elderly people – promoting contact between them.
      Given that there are sufficient attractive spaces for all generati-
      ons, everybody might have a chance to get together. We should
      create places where everybody can meet – children and elderly
      people, handicapped and non-handicapped people, males and
      females, residents and visitors.
Kaname Yanagisawa
   Chiba University,   Collaborative Design Studio for Universal Design in Chiba University   365
             Japan



                       Some results from the studio
                       Mr. Yasuyuki Iguchi, Architecture student
                       This student focuses on psychological comfort. He uses various
                       and distinctive colours, materials, and geometric forms on
                       walls, ceiling, and floor, creating an easily understandable and
                       comfortable space.
366                        UNIVERSAL design   Part 3 Asia and Australia




      Ms. Yoko Oikawa, Architecture student
      This student created several small buildings, offering a diversity
      of colours and materials. She studied the psychological effects
      of colours and materials, and applied them in her design. The
      result is several small rectangular buildings, which look diffe-
      rent and have different sizes, spaces, colours and materials, to
      match individual taste.
Kaname Yanagisawa
   Chiba University,   Collaborative Design Studio for Universal Design in Chiba University   367
             Japan



                       Mr. Yosuke Kitazawa, Architecture student
                       This student chose to refurbish an existing building. He desig-
                       ned its interior from the viewpoint of universal design. He
                       widened the hallway and rearranged the setting of furniture and
                       partitions for easy moving. He also introduced several devices
                       to give a comfortable feeling to visitors.
368                        UNIVERSAL design   Part 3 Asia and Australia




      Ms. Akiko Itai, Architecture student
      This student designed a restaurant that can change its interior
      setting according to season and time. Furniture, decoration, par-
      tition, lighting, food, and table settings are removable and
      changeable, adjusting to summer and winter, or daytime and
      nighttime. Visitors might enjoy a different atmosphere in a
      space each time they go.
Kaname Yanagisawa
   Chiba University,   Collaborative Design Studio for Universal Design in Chiba University   369
             Japan



                       Mr. Jun Murakoshi, Mr. Shun Hashizume, Ms.
                       Akiko Tanaka, Ms. Yukiko Koide, Mr. Yutaka
                       Yoshiyachi, Design students group work
                       This group designed a building to promote exchange between
                       different generations. They put wooden decks and other commu-
                       nication spaces, like those that old Japanese houses used to have.
370                       UNIVERSAL design   Part 3 Asia and Australia




      Ms. Junko Tanaka, Mr. Kentaro Sekine, Ms.
      Kyoko Higashihara, Design students group work
      This group designed several types of dining spaces in a building
      to meet different people’s needs and interests. These include a
      large open space, a space with table and furniture, Japanese
      tatami-matted space, a cave-like space, an outdoor terrace and
      outdoor garden. They also designed unique outdoor paths for
      attracting children’s play.
Kaname Yanagisawa
   Chiba University,   Collaborative Design Studio for Universal Design in Chiba University   371
             Japan
372   UNIVERSAL design   Part 3 Asia and Australia




                                                     Photo: Jon Christophersen
        Makoto Yanagisawa
         and Tadao Shimizu      Universal Design Competition for Students 2000 Nagoya/Japan           373
Nagoya City University, Japan




                                3.5 Universal Design
                                Competition for
                                Students 2000
                                Nagoya/Japan
                                Prof. Makoto Yanagisawa, Nagoya City University and Tadao
                                Shimizu, Chiba University, Japan.


                                Background of the Participating
                                Universities
                                There are design and architecture departments in many
                                Japanese universities and colleges. Many of the design-related
                                departments are found in the faculty of art or in art colleges; the
                                rest are in technological or educational schools. On the other
                                hand, most architecture-related departments belong to technolo-
                                gical schools, colleges or universities. From an educational
                                point of view, design and architecture therefore seem to be
                                separated.

                                The reason for this separation is that design, in its early days in
                                Japan, was interpreted as an applied art. It was consequently
                                logical to situate the design education in the schools of art,
                                while architecture, where the focus was on structure and materi-
                                als that resist such external forces as earthquakes, became a
                                part of the engineering schools. However, as the idea got disse-
                                minated that both design and architecture are important for the
                                creation of environment in which people live and that both are
                                essential for the enhancement of the quality of life, the wall be-
                                tween the two was lowered and now, mutual relationship and
                                the importance of the collaboration is being discussed in the
                                field of education.

                                Essentially, universal design should be taken into consideration
                                as a basic element whenever something is being planned or
                                designed. Therefore, universal design is now being used as a
                                catalyst for considerations to promote the collaboration and har-
                                monization of design and architecture. Universal design is get-
                                ting much attention as a subject which should engage various
374                        UNIVERSAL design   Part 3 Asia and Australia




      fields, across the conventional boundaries of design and archi-
      tecture and including information design. Universal design is a
      comprehensive theme covering diverse subjects such as tools,
      architecture and urban issues. Unfortunately, universal design is
      not yet nationally recognized, and with few exceptions, the
      course is not officially incorporated into the curriculum.

      About the competition
      Six professors of design and architecture with particular interest
      in universal design organized a committee to hold the competi-
      tion for students. As organizers and planning committee mem-
      bers, they encouraged students both nationwide and at their
      schools and universities.

      However, through the nationwide promotional activities, the
      entries were not limited to the students of design and architec-
      ture; there were also entries from students majoring in informa-
      tion design and education and from landscape architecture
      students – the latter attend schools of agriculture as well as
      those who are. This proves that the competition has made a
      great contribution to the dissemination of universal design. The
      general interest in this subject was reflected in the number of
      inquiries made to the Secretariat. The fact that judging was
      open to the public and the applicants proved to be encouraging
      for the students and provided an opportunity of exchanges
      among the participants.

      The objective of the competition
      This student competition was held in the spring of 2000, organi-
      zed by Prof. Makoto Yanagisawa, Nagoya City University, and
      sponsored by Matsushita Electric Works Ltd.. The objective of
      the competition was to provide an opportunity for design students
      to enhance their understanding of universal design and help them
      to reflect the acquired knowledge in their own projects.

      Entries and judging
      By the closing day (2000, Mar. 1st), 45 entries were submitted
      from ten Universities and six Graduate Schools in Japan. The
      jury committee was composed of six judges, selected from
      Japanese schools of architecture and design:
         Makoto Yanagisawa (Nagoya City Univ./Chair person)
         Toshiharu Arai (Kanazawa College of Art)
         Kazuo Kawasaki (Nagoya City Univ.)
         Takahito Saeki (Kobe Design Univ.)
        Makoto Yanagisawa
         and Tadao Shimizu      Universal Design Competition for Students 2000 Nagoya/Japan         375
Nagoya City University, Japan



                                   Tadao Shimizu (Chiba Univ.)
                                   Gen Taniguchi (Nagoya Univ.)
                                Judging was done in two stages. During the first stage all
                                entries were scrutinised and a short list of 12 works were selec-
                                ted for the final stage. Uniquely, the judging process was open
                                to both the entrants and the public. At the second and final
                                stage, held on May 6th at Nagoya City University presentation
                                hall, each of the finalists presented their works for an audience
                                of more than 170. After the presentations, discussions and
                                voting, the judges selected three prizewinners and nine honou-
                                rable mentions.

                                Future development
                                There are requests to continue this type of competition. It will
                                be ideal if it becomes an international open competition not
                                limited to the Japanese students. But at the same time, we
                                should take into consideration cultural, social and economic
                                differences that each individual country has in terms of univer-
                                sal design. No set of established values or standards should be
                                imposed. Further international exchanges of information will
                                become more and more important.

                                The prizes
                                The first prize
                                The first prize was awarded a proposal entitled «Japanese tradi-
                                tional Veranda + mud room = mud veranda?» by Tsukasa
                                Sasaki, Shiho Mohri and Genki Tanaka. All are second year stu-
                                dents at the Master Course of Architecture at the, Graduate
                                School of Nagoya University.

                                In their work a survey was conducted to assess the current situ-
                                ation of a traditional commercial area adjacent to a station. The
                                result shows an increase of older people, decrease of the
                                younger generation, and decline of business due to large-scale
                                suburban shopping establishments. As a consequence, houses
                                and properties in the area have been sold off, causing several to
                                be vacant. Based on these facts, the authors have proposed to
                                use a vacant lot to put up a temporary building with a Japanese
                                traditional veranda and mudroom. Their intention is to create an
                                arena for direct communication among neighbours, thus enhan-
                                cing the relationship among a broader range of people in the
                                community and helping them to create a development as well as
                                developing ideas for its implementation. Japanese traditional
                                Verandas and mudrooms function as semi public spaces, brid-
376                            UNIVERSAL design    Part 3 Asia and Australia




      ging the private and the public open space. Spaces with such a
      function can be found in any traditional residential area in
      Japan. In this proposal various ideas and devices are introduced
      to attract and facilitate the gathering of the neighbours inclu-
      ding access for old and handicapped people to the temporary
      building. Members of the judging committee highly evaluated
      the fact that this work has introduced universal design in a
      broad perspective, and that it is not limited to the solution of
      existing barriers but also incorporates extensive future visions.




      “ENGAWA”+“DOMA”=“ENDOMA”
      “Engawa” and “Doma” have been the traditional spaces for connecting
      interior and outdoor space. They have been instrumental in creating open-
      ness of the house providing delicate interplay of the interior space with the
      outside urban and natural environment. But most of Japanese contempo-
      rary houses don’t have such spaces. Using the open spaces that are eve-
      rywhere in the town, we tried to make the places for intergenerational
      communication. This trial is UD for reconsidering the milieu of all.

      Authors: Tsukasa Sasaki and Shiho Mori, Dept. of Architecture, Nagoya
      Univ.; Motoki Tanaka and Shinichi Kurimoto, Dept. of Civil engneering
      and Architecture, school of eng., Nagoya Univ.
        Makoto Yanagisawa
         and Tadao Shimizu      Universal Design Competition for Students 2000 Nagoya/Japan         377
Nagoya City University, Japan



                                The second prize
                                The «Universal Grip», by Goshuu Sawada and Hideki Kato,
                                senior students of Life Environmental Design Dept. of Nagoya
                                City University, received second prize.

                                The authors had started out with a basic question of how people
                                change the way of gripping things according to the shape of the
                                object. They analysed this using numerous models, which were
                                tested in collaboration with the residents at nursing homes.
                                Based on the findings, they made a design proposal for a key
                                holder. Further studies comparing the proposed object with
                                existing products in the market to find out the advantages of the
                                former and the disadvantages of the latter are expected.
378                            UNIVERSAL design    Part 3 Asia and Australia




      UNIVERSAL GRIP to SMART GRIP
      We think that it is necessary to design things to impress and please their
      users, which means that it is important to know human beings well. Our
      hands have evolved for a long time. We surveyed the function of them,
      which are to hold, grip, grasp, catch, clutch, grab, beat, hit, slap, strike,
      twist, scratch, turn, tear, knock, etc. After that we reached the conclusion
      that five of them are the most important to live our everyday life. Then, we
      made the design survey of the forms which are friendly for every body,
      including those who have handicaps in their hands.

      Authors: Takehide Sawada and Aicih Prefectual University Fine Arts and
      Music Design Master Course, Hideki Kato, Nagoya City University School
      of Design and Architecture Department of Human Environmental Design
           Makoto Yanagisawa
            and Tadao Shimizu        Universal Design Competition for Students 2000 Nagoya/Japan                    379
   Nagoya City University, Japan



                                    The third prize
                                    The third prize was warded to a work titled «Hearty Parking
                                    Sphere», a design by Megumi Morishita. The author attends the
                                    second year of Environmental Design Engineering at the gradu-
                                    ate school of Fukui University.

                                    The proposal is a simple roof for parking lots made of thin air
                                    bags. The height of the roof can be adjusted according to the time
                                    of day and changes of climate. It is a user-friendly design particu-
                                    larly with regard to wheelchair users, old people and others who
                                    may need much time to get in and out of the vehicles. Although
                                    there might be structural problems with strong winds, it was
                                    highly evaluated as a visionary proposal from a young student.




HEARTY PARKING
For the people who drive cars, a parking lot connects roads with architecture. While a road is space for cars
and an architecture is people but only as incidental facilities of a architecture for cars. To get on or off cars
in the rain or the snow is very uncomfortable in a parking lot without a roof, especially for the handicapped.
Many parking lots don’t function as an interface of architecture with cars.

For the effective interface function, I would like to propose a design of a parking lot with a concept of
“HEARTY PARKING”, which is comfortable for people on a rainy or snowy day. At the time of getting on and
off of the car in the rain, you might have experienced that someone has held an umbrella over your head,
which has made you very pleased. My design comes from those experiences of an umbrella by someone else,
and it is designed not only for bad weather but also for the night. Considering the general and comprehensive
idea of UD, I would like to propose a parking lot with a partial roof of the design of an air skin structure.
Author: Megumi Morishita, Fukui University graduate school, Master of engineering
380                                                             UNIVERSAL design   Part 3 Asia and Australia




                                        Honorable mentions
                                        Proposals receiving honourable mentions included the follo-
                                        wing:
                                        – A detachable handle to hold cups securely, particularly suited
                                          for people who have reduced strength problems with hands
                                          and fingers.
                                        – A design to enjoy all four seasons in an urban park without
                                          being aware of handicaps.
                                        – A design for an urban park which can be used by everybody
                                          in all four seasons, regardless of handicaps.
                                        – A unique and delightful radio with a design based on the
                                          result of a survey which showed that a simple shape and sim-
                                          ple handling which respond to the fingers are effective for
                                          the visually impaired and people with memory disorders.




      FOURP Our Cup with Four Points
      – An environment and furniture at a children’s playground where people of different generations can play
      with children. This design proposal is based on a study conducted on site and the furniture was actually
      made and used for experimental purposes.
      Author: Tomoko Yagi, Art education senior at Fukui University
        Makoto Yanagisawa
         and Tadao Shimizu      Universal Design Competition for Students 2000 Nagoya/Japan          381
Nagoya City University, Japan




                                EASY TO USE RADIO
                                Authors: Shinya Matsuyama, Wakayama University, Faculty of Systems
                                Engineering Design and Information Sciences Design Fundamentals



                                Summary
                                Interestingly and favourably, when seen as a whole, the entries
                                to the design competition were by and large based on honest
                                research. Also, it was impressive that the design solutions were
                                attempted not only for a single objective but had social implica-
                                tions, taking the surrounding situations into consideration.
                                Students may be interpreting «universal design» as an expanded
                                concept in which people and nature live in harmony, not limited
                                to solutions of physical problems. It is indeed the direction that
                                the organizers of the competition had anticipated.


                                Judges’ comments
                                Prof. Toshiharu Arai (Kanazawa University of Art and Craft)
                                Universal design is based on the concept that people are really
                                living life cycles with a wide variety of abilities and that they
                                are continuously building different relationships. When we look
382                         UNIVERSAL design   Part 3 Asia and Australia




      at that fact, new or intrinsic relations are conceived between
      people and tools. A common subject assigned to the competi-
      tion must be to understand the problems as facts and how to
      find a solution _ not just for the sake of problem solving, but to
      look for creative solutions with a universal dimension. Logic as
      a base of things and formativeness as a form of things; how can
      they be represented in design clearly and balanced? It is exactly
      what was requested.

      Judging the entries was very stimulating as it encompassed
      whole life space including environment, architecture and pro-
      duct design. Design activities originate from specific sites or
      situations but there are many different answers to their develop-
      ments. I thought that in the universal design competition, the
      process itself could be a study of universal design since it is still
      in the cradle. Now I feel that it was right to believe so including
      the process of public judging. Future challenge in the area of
      product design is to create 1/1 model or 1/1 model of details to
      check the function and finish the final design based on such
      models.
      I would like to extend my deep appreciation to all the students
      of various fields who have participated in this competition.

      Prof. Kazuo Kawasaki (School of Design and Architecture.
      Nagoya City University)
      The term «universal design» is rapidly gaining ground.
      Especially in Japan, it is almost like a craze as the aged society
      arrives. Under such circumstances, students have seriously wor-
      ked on the ideas and drawings to embody the philosophy of uni-
      versal design. This was the first competition of its kind, yet
      entries were versatile, ranging from tools and equipments for
      daily life to urban landscape. We had about fifty entries but
      were able to go through the first-stage judgment actively and
      carefully. Applicants showed models and made visual presenta-
      tions in the second stage presentation. I believe that the public
      judging was innovative and of great success.

      My judging criteria were on what issue the applicant’s awa-
      reness is focused and what his/her theme is, i.e. awareness and
      understanding of a problem. Drawings and designs are impor-
      tant, as solutions for the problems while understanding should
      be transformed into design expressions as social answers.

      Based on such personal criteria I verified the originality of the
      ideas in the first-stage judgment. In the second-stage, I checked
        Makoto Yanagisawa
         and Tadao Shimizu      Universal Design Competition for Students 2000 Nagoya/Japan          383
Nagoya City University, Japan



                                if the answers and solutions were expressed clearly and concre-
                                tely and if the messages could be transmitted as an expression. I
                                judged that every prize-winning piece is persuasive enough as
                                solutions, while unsuccessful winners’ pieces remained only as
                                answers and were not stimulating enough as solutions.
                                However, the differences were slight and it was difficult to rank
                                them.

                                This competition required appropriate written expression for
                                the concept in the first-stage and presentation skill in the
                                second-stage. While interpretation of the philosophy of univer-
                                sal design itself was new, this new methodology for a design
                                competition was innovative and successful.

                                I sincerely hope that this type of competition will be widely
                                accepted and continued. Lastly, I would like to pay respect and
                                express my appreciation for the efforts taken not only by the
                                winners but also by all applicants.

                                Prof. Takato Saiki (Kobe Design University)
                                “Enchantment of Universal Design” – this competition for the
                                students brought me some discoveries.

                                The first discovery is that the entries by the students from vari-
                                ous fields contributed to make the presentations and judging in
                                the second-stage very exciting. For those applicants who are
                                usually studying designs in one’s specialized area, it must have
                                been a new experience to participate in the public judging.
                                Recently, there are various competitions, small and large in
                                scale, but most of them are planned and carried out within spe-
                                cific areas and directed towards those involved in that field.
                                Naturally, the results are presented only to that specific area of
                                expertise. In contrast to such competitions, «Universal Design
                                Competition for Students» was indeed in line with the objecti-
                                ves of universal design; designs of relations, sharing of social
                                issues and creation of safe, comfortable and enjoyable environ-
                                ment. Entries were full of youthful and healthy ideas to accom-
                                plish afore-mentioned objectives.

                                What was particularly impressive to me was the fact that the
                                applicants were not simply interested in the creation of a pro-
                                duct but had social viewpoints, had undertaken field work and
                                tested the designs. They actually went to town and visited insti-
                                tutions and reviewed the designs directly. Contents of many pre-
                                sentations have shown remarkable improvement compared to
384                         UNIVERSAL design   Part 3 Asia and Australia




      the first-stage judging. It made me feel that the design should
      always be in response to the changing society.

      Another discovery was that the students did not limit the
      designs to a visible expression. They linked it to the rules of life
      and social information systems and their proposals were based
      on that. People who are somewhat retreating in their closed
      world are brought back to the ordinary world, and the designs
      of the invisible world were experimented to give them energy in
      the life space. The students looked at the mechanisms of old life
      and society, which are almost forgotten in the course of evolu-
      tion and discovered them as design sources.

      Judging of the works of such diversified areas was a new expe-
      rience for the judges as well but I felt it stimulating as respon-
      ses to the questions raised by open-minded students.

      Prof. Tadao Shimizu (Design Engineering Dept. School of
      Engineering, Chiba University)
      This was the first competition of this kind and I assume the
      applicants must have felt somewhat lost as to how the theme
      should be tackled. It was a thought-provoking experience for
      the judges as well. However, it was most delightful to have
      entries from various fields with different views and angles.

      What was impressive to me was, as represented in the first
      prize-winning piece, that the students worked on universal
      design not only as a direct solution to satisfy the functional
      requirements of the goods or space but tried to expand their
      efforts even to emotional aspects. Relatively limited time might
      not have allowed the applicants to create anything based on
      serious testing. However, the very basic of universal design lies
      in the idea of paying attention to a wide range of people and
      situations around us and to find the most relevant solution rat-
      her than individual completeness. Therefore, this trend is most
      welcome. As was described in the qualification, most of the
      prize-winning pieces were not mere ideas but based on some
      research and further development of the findings. I respected
      that point. Currently the market is full of products reflecting
      irresponsible thinking of «Let’s try. If it goes well, that’s OK. If
      it doesn’t, let’s forget about it and try something else.»
      I personally believe that universal design should retain a rather
      critical attitude toward such current state.
        Makoto Yanagisawa
         and Tadao Shimizu      Universal Design Competition for Students 2000 Nagoya/Japan          385
Nagoya City University, Japan



                                Prof. Gen Taniguchi (School of Engineering Nagoya
                                University)
                                Whether it could be a product, building or urban planning, for
                                those who are engaged in the design-related occupation, univer-
                                sal design is becoming essential in order to survive in this
                                industry. Therefore, it should be incorporated in the educational
                                program for future designers. Looking at 45 entries I felt the
                                efforts of both applicants and educators were fully rewarded.

                                The first prize-winning work is an idea to revitalize a once-
                                active old street space. It is excellent because the proposal
                                incorporates the concept of universal design. This can be a sug-
                                gestion for Japan to free herself from scrap-and-build or consu-
                                ming-and-developing society.

                                The second prize-winning piece, «Universal Grip», was highly
                                evaluated as it expressed the process of a man’s motion of
                                «gripping» which creates various attractive forms.

                                «Hearty Parking Sphere», the third prize-winning work, is still
                                incomplete in its detailed technical processing but it is exciting
                                as I visualize the beautiful landscape it would add to a town. It
                                is one of the proposals I wish to be materialized.

                                When I thought of a society full of equipments like «Can I help
                                you?» I was first sceptical, thinking that it would promote the
                                alienation of man. But recently, I attended a meeting to study
                                universal design in airports and there, an apparently healthy
                                person who actually was hard of hearing talked about his pro-
                                blem of letting others know of his difficulty. It made me feel
                                that there is a potential for such equipment. For me, who am
                                specialized in architecture and urban planning, this competition
                                was a good opportunity to learn about ideas in the design field.

                                Prof. Makoto Yanagisawa (School of Design and Architecture.
                                Nagoya City University)
                                I wish to put the spirit of universal design into the minds of the
                                students. I wish to nurture the spirit of caring in their minds. I
                                wish them to be patient enough to work up from concepts to
                                concrete ideas. This competition for students was based on
                                these wishes. Before Prof. Shimizu made a presentation in
                                America on the results of the competition, I made the following
                                short speech:
386                        UNIVERSAL design   Part 3 Asia and Australia




      Although I will be 70 years old next January, I don’t know yet
      how institutions for the aged should be. I may not understand it
      well until I myself get physically weak. It must be too deman-
      ding to ask young students to think about environment and pro-
      ducts for every type of people. But designers are always
      requested to think about the world that they have never experi-
      enced. This must be an excellent opportunity for the students to
      work on the most challenging assignment.

      I was excited to find 45 entries on the closing day. Moreover,
      most of the work showed the results of the applicants’ hard
      work and it made me happy. The date of public judging happe-
      ned to be a holiday due to the schedule of all judges but to my
      big surprise, the hall was full of people and the chairs provided
      there were not enough. Under such circumstances, it must have
      been hard for the judges to have public judging but I believe it
      was good for the participants.

      I would like to express my sincere thanks to the very, very busy
      judges who have worked without any remuneration. The exci-
      ting poster is a work of Prof. Kawasaki and we owe much to
      Matsushita Electric Works Ltd, which has supported us financi-
      ally. Also, I would like to mention the names of the people who
      have helped us in organizing the event. Mr. Mikio Higashiyama
      a member of Society for Health Design Study from Eba
      Corporation., Mr. Yuzo Kurahashi of Nihon Shooter Ltd., Mr.
      Sakamoto of Nagoya Isu Co. Ltd., Ms. Ami Wada and Ms.
      Miyako Matsushita of Yanagisawa Lab. Many of the students of
      the Nagoya City University, the students of Yanagisawa Lab in
      particular, helped us extensively. I hope this competition will be
      a significant milestone in the education of universal design.
